What if Trump wins the 2024 Presidential Election?















Former President Donald Trump on Tuesday defeated Nikki Haley in New Hampshire — a state that the former South Carolina governor clearly needed to win.

But Haley is vowing to stay in the race, and the former president is openly seething about it all.

"Could somebody please explain to Nikki Haley that she lost — and lost really badly," Trump wrote on Truth Social early on Wednesday morning. "She also lost Iowa, BIG, last week."

At his election night party on Tuesday, Trump was even nastier.

"You must really hate her," Trump said to South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott, the former 2024 contender who backed the former president over Haley, who appointed him to the Senate seat he now holds.

"I just love you!" Scott replied.

By taking such a swipe at Haley in front of a fellow South Carolinian, especially one who has a long history with her, Trump is looking to severely undermine her before the state's February 24 primary.

It's a strategy he employed last weekend when he invited South Carolina Gov. Henry McMaster and other top GOP backers from the state to a New Hampshire rally — in an attempt to paint her as an unappealing candidate even by those who know her best. ( McMaster had already endorsed Trump before Haley formally entered the presidential race last year.)

Haley is going to pull out all the stops in order to perform well in her home state, but polling shows that she's still the underdog.

As of January 24, Trump maintains a wide lead in FiveThirtyEight's weighted polling average of the South Carolina GOP primary, with the former president currently averaging 62.2% support and Haley averaging 25% support.

While the former president wants the GOP race to end so he can turn his full attention to President Joe Biden, Haley believes she has the best chance at helping the party win back the White House — a powerful motivator for her.

Trump remains the miles-ahead favorite in the slew of Super Tuesday states on March 5, where he could all but lock up the nomination in terms of the delegate count. But Haley is convinced that she's the next-generation leader that the GOP needs to advance to the future, and she's determined to continue making her case to that effect.















2024 Presidential Election odds for Trump victory
 Impact of former presidents winning elections on US policies and international relations
 Historical precedences of non-consecutive presidential terms
 Economic forecasts under a second Trump administration
 Immigration policies projection under Trump 2024 administration
 Climate change policies under a potential Trump second presidency
 Potential Supreme Court appointments during a second Trump term
 US foreign policy shifts with Trump re-election in 2024
 Changes to healthcare legislation with Trump 2024 win
 Tech industry response to Trump winning 2024 election
 Trump 2024 election effect on US-China relations
 Trade policy expectations under a Trump administration
 Defense spending and military strategy forecasts for Trump 2024
 Public reaction and civil society implications of Trump re-election
 Trump's approach to education policy in a second term
 Social media and freedom of speech under a second Trump presidency
 Federal reserve and monetary policy under Trump's potential second term
 Environmental deregulation under Trump administration sequel
 NATO and transatlantic relations forecast with Trump re-election
 Trump administration's strategy on North Korea and Iran post 2024 win.















Expect the stock market to retreat, a recession to strike, and inflation to drop below 2% by the end of this year, Steve Hanke says.

"As far as the outlook for stocks goes, they remain pricey, and the multiples will come off as the recession starts to bite," the professor of applied economics at Johns Hopkins University told Business Insider this week.

The benchmark S&P 500 index rallied by 24% in 2023 and now trades close to a record high. Stocks are typically valued at multiples to company earnings, so they tend to fall when multiples contract or earnings shrink — both of which can happen in an economic downturn when investor sentiment and corporate profits usually suffer.

Hanke, a former economic advisor to Ronald Reagan, served as the president of Toronto Trust Argentina when it was the world's best-performing market mutual fund in 1995. His view is that the volatile inflation of recent years is chiefly due to changes in the US money supply, not other factors such as supply-chain disruptions and swings in energy and metal prices.

The veteran economist and a colleague, John Greenwood, predicted in July 2021 that the headline consumer price index would rise as quickly as 9% on an annualized basis; it peaked at 9.1% a year later. They later forecast the inflation measure would fall to between 2% and 5% by December last year, and it ended the year at 3.4%.

"As Milton Friedman taught us long ago, inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon," Hanke said. "That's why our forecast, based off the quantity theory of money, has been so accurate."

Now, Hanke and Greenwood predict headline inflation will fall below the Federal Reserve's target rate of 2% by the end of this year. They proposed in the National Review this week that 6% annual growth in M2, a broad measure of money supply, would most likely keep inflation around the 2% mark.

The two men declared in December that " money is the economy's fuel ," and material changes in its supply had a lagged effect on economic growth, spending, and the pace of price increases. They warned the US economy was "running on fumes" and "on schedule to tank," given its money supply had plunged since March 2022, after growing by a historic 27% in the year through February 2021 in part due to stimulus measures during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Hanke has been issuing similar warnings for some time. He cautioned last February that stocks could be hit by shrinking corporate profits and output and bemoaned in August that complacent investors were "sleepwalking" into a market slump and a recession.
The Biden campaign is planning an aggressive effort to highlight the stakes of the 2024 election for abortion access around what would have been the 51st anniversary of Roe v. Wade.

President Biden and Vice President Harris will headline a rally in Virginia on Wednesday to discuss the threat Republicans would pose to abortion rights if they win back the White House. The rally comes after Virginia Democrats secured majorities in the state Legislature largely because of the issue of abortion.

They team also plans to launch a new paid media campaign aimed at women and swing voters in battleground states focusing on the impact abortion bans nationwide have had on women and health care providers following the end of Roe.

“Donald Trump is the reason that more than 1 in 3 American women of reproductive age don’t have the freedom to make their own health care decisions,” Biden campaign manager Julie Chavez Rodriguez said in a statement. “Now, he and MAGA Republicans are running to go even further if they retake the White House.”

“Trump directly paved the way for Republican extremists across the country to enact draconian bans that are hurting women and threatening doctors,” she continued. “In 2024, a vote for Joe Biden and Kamala Harris is a vote to restore Roe, and a vote for Donald Trump is a vote to ban abortion across the country.”

Abortion is set to be a pivotal issue in the 2024 election after the Supreme Court struck down Roe v. Wade in June 2022, ending federal protections and paving the way for numerous Republican-led states to pass restrictions on abortion access.

Democrats have successfully campaigned on protecting abortion access in the nearly two years since, winning gubernatorial and state legislative races, as well as passing ballot measures to guarantee access.

The Biden campaign is hoping to deploy a similar strategy, warning frequently that a Republican in the White House could pass a national abortion ban.

Former President Trump, the leading candidate for the GOP nomination, has repeatedly dodged questions about whether he would sign legislation restricting abortion. But, he has also on numerous occasions said he deserves the credit for ending Roe, citing his appointment of three conservative Supreme Court justices.

For the latest news, weather, sports, and streaming video, head to The Hill.
For Democrats who focus on the Latino vote, the numbers are etched in their minds.

In 2012, Barack Obama reached a sky-high level of 71% Hispanic support, while Hillary Clinton received 66% in her losing campaign.

But as President Biden's re-election campaign kicks into high gear, one under reported characteristic of the Latino electorate could play a critical role in whether Biden is able to able to keep or exceed the lower, but still crucial, 59% Latino support he earned while winning the presidency in 2020.

According to a robust UnidosUS poll of 3,037 Hispanic eligible voters from the end of the year, 22% of Latinos will be voting in their first presidential election in 2024, with a surprising 38% of the Latino electorate — nearly 4 in 10 voters — being new since Clinton and Donald Trump faced off in 2016.

The politically important Latino vote is often described as not being monolithic and also very young compared to other groups. But these findings also show that the Hispanic electorate is not static and evolving every cycle.

In 2024, according to Pew Hispanic's Mark Hugo Lopez, the major growth of new Latino voters since 2020 is coming from U.S.-born Hispanics who are turning 18. That means of the 4 million new Latino voters — which includes U.S. born, those who are naturalizing, and a small number who are coming from Puerto Rico and can vote as U.S. citizens — about 3 million are U.S.-born Latinos coming of age and eligible to vote.

The Democratic Party - already cognizant that its support from Hispanics has eroded over the last decade, particularly with Latino men, now faces the daunting prospect of needing to defeat Trump again with a Biden campaign that is tasked with mobilizing a Latino electorate that increasingly does not have the same affinity for the Democratic Party as it did in past cycles.

"People talk about the problem he has with the youth vote, the f***ing youth vote is the Latino vote," said Mike Madrid, a longtime Republican operative who broke with the party after the rise of Trump and is the author of "The Latino Century: How America’s Largest Minority is Shaping Our Democracy," out in June.

Madrid refers to Pew Hispanic numbers showing that Latinos comprise 21% of the nearly 50 million eligible voters under 30 and nearly one in four voters 18 to 24-years-old.

While he believes the fundamentals of the race are as strong in favoring an incumbent re-election as they have been since 1996, despite the panic among Democrats, Madrid said the height of the immigration wave from the mid-1990s to 2007 have led to a boom of U.S.-born young Latinos entering the electorate who care less about immigration and won't be reached through Spanish-language ads on Univision and Telemundo.

"We know the quantifiable problem Biden has with U.S.-born Hispanics and with young voters and that problem still persists," he said.

A Univision poll this fall that otherwise showed Biden outperforming Trump with Latinos over the 2020 result, revealed that while Biden doubled Trump's support with Spanish-dominant Hispanics, he led only 46% to 43% among English-speaking Latinos.

Still, the Biden campaign has made engaging young Hispanics an integral part of their overall Latino strategy, treating the group like persuadable voters, not just get out-the-vote targets. It began investing earlier and more consistently, it told The Messenger, to drive a connection between popular issues and Biden with the understanding that it will ultimately take time to drive up support.

"Young Latinos are key to our reelection, which is why we're investing earlier than ever to mobilize them around an agenda that is fighting for their future," said campaign spokesperson Kevin Munoz. "It's still early in the cycle, but we are laying strong foundations in place to energize and activate young Latinos around the issues they care most about, while highlighting the real threat Donald Trump and MAGA Republicans pose to their freedoms, our democracy, and their economic well-being."

Like its previous Democratic presidential campaign counterparts, the Biden campaign fields well-meaning private calls from Democrats with suggestions on how to reach Latinos better, which it prefers over public criticism. But at least one Democratic operative has grown frustrated, after privately bringing her concerns to the Biden administration on their problem with Hispanic voters, to no avail.

“I don’t think they know how to reach these younger voters. A lot of the people making decisions do not have an understanding of cultural sensitivities with Latin American diasporas in the United States,” Evelyn Pérez Verdia, a Democratic strategist for over two decades in Florida, told The Messenger. “We can’t continue to talk to Hispanics like it’s one group and we all think the same — not just country of origin but also subculture depending on if you were born in the U.S.”

The TikTok Election

When the Biden campaign outlined its " football y futbol " strategy featuring a Spanglish ad on streaming platforms alongside NFL and Liga MX soccer programming this fall, it was obvious that the campaign was attempting to address shortcomings with Latino men. But consultant Adrian Saenz made clear the outreach was aimed at young Latinos as well.

The campaign has since last year been interested not just in the policy issues young Hispanic voters care about, but also what it calls the right "media mix" to reach them, poring over the latest Nielsen and Pew reports to understand what streaming platforms and social media apps young Latinos are using.

"The Latino electorate is growing and replenishing at such a rate - which makes it different than any other group in the country with the most first-time and second-time voters," said pollster Matt Barreto who is working with the Biden campaign again in 2024. "It's important to remember when you’re looking at data, they look up for grabs, but they just have less experience voting so they need more outreach."

The campaign has more planned outreach aimed at young voters and young Latinos in the coming months, which it believes will also help solidify key states like Arizona, which Biden won by 11,000 votes in 2020, North Carolina, which has the most first-time Latino voters of any state, and Georgia, which Biden won by less than 12,000 votes.

Latinos over the age of 60 are six-to-one Democrat, Barreto said - not as strong as older Black voters, but they remember civil rights marches and the infamous Prop 187 in California, which created a Latino civil rights moment in California.

It adds up to more "crystallized partisanship" than their younger counterparts, which he said is normal.

"I challenge anyone to find me data that young Latinos are warming to Donald Trump," he said, adding that they're "very upset about January 6, very upset about abortion, climate change, and gun violence. Those are issues where the contrast comes in."

Kristian Ramos, a Democratic consultant and Latino vote expert, told The Messenger it's easy to forget young people have engaged in record turnout since 2016, noting that a CIRCLE analysis from Tufts University found half of young voters voted in 2020, an 11-point increase over 2016.

"There's no question right now there is some wandering of the coalition of younger folks and there is some frustration but that does not translate to support for Donald Trump," he said. "I don't think there has ever been a more unpopular presidential candidate for young people. He got rid of Roe v. Wade, he is antagonistic to climate change, and believes American politics should go back to the 1950’s.

Still, recent polling has shown Trump at times leading among young voters, with Biden dragged down by third-party candidates and the war between Israel and Hamas.

Giancarlo Sopo, a Republican operative who led Trump's Hispanic advertising in 2020, said polling data highlights a crucial trend.

"Hispanics under 30 trend more liberal and are notably less inclined to identify as Republican; however, they also exhibit a higher degree of political apathy," he said. "This presents significant challenges and opportunities for both parties. For Democrats, the task is to galvanize voters who are ideologically sympathetic, but characteristically less motivated to vote. For the GOP, there's ample room for growth, but many of these voters live in expensive media markets. The party that effectively engages and mobilizes this demographic will have a distinct advantage."

Imer Cespedes-Alvarado, 20, a UNLV student in Las Vegas, and founder of Youth Voice of Nevada, said his group is nonpartisan but most of the time finds themselves aligned with Democrats — but just not on the war that has left 1200 Israelis dead after the October 7 terrorist attack and more than 22,000 Palestinians killed, the majority women and children.

"Right now we've been having conversations with the youth here in Nevada who believe Biden is less worse than Trump," he said of the prospect of voting. "But at the same time with the war going on and situations across the world, people want to stay home."

Santiago Mayer, 22, moved to the U.S. in 2017 from Mexico when two things triggered his interest in political advocacy: Trump calling Mexican immigrants rapists and murderers, he says, and the Muslim ban, instituted by Trump in the early days of his presidency, which is how he learned how disconnected young people were from politics because they didn’t know it was happening. It led to him starting Voters of Tomorrow.

He said how young people feel about the war in Gaza is complicated.

"Young people are very empathetic, they want Israelis and Palestinians to be safe, we want everyone to be safe," he said. "Young people, Gen Z want peace and love across the world, it sounds corny, but it’s true."

He said he is much less concerned with what is happening now than what happens over the next few months with a possible end to the war in sight.

"If people are mad, how are we winning them back?" he asked. "The answer is not to scold or scream at them on Twitter. If we want young people to vote, show them a vision for what comes next. Not just on this issue, but across the board, from abortion rights, to banning assault rifles, student debt and climate. Tell them what Joe Biden is for while Trump is screaming about taking backwards, authoritarian steps."

For its part, the Biden campaign, which sees young Latinos as persuadable voters, agrees.

"The goal is the same," Saenz said. "You gotta move 'em from where you are today, to being for the president, to getting you out to vote."

But beyond YouTube, Hulu, ESPN Deportes, and other streaming TV platforms with English and Spanglish messages, the campaign eyes the social media juggernaut TikTok as a key part of the media mix for young Latinos, given that it is the fastest growing platform where people get their news.

Consider this: In 2020, just 3% of U.S adults got their news from TikTok, but now that number is one-third for 18 to 29-year-olds, according to a Pew Research Center report from November.

The campaign envisions a combination of celebrities, young influencers, and even "micro-influencers" who may have influence in a single policy area as worthwhile partners to provide more organic feeling content.

"Getting to the right micro-influencer in Las Vegas or Tucson or Charlotte needs to be part of our strategy, which is still developing, but this is the goal," Saenz said.

"This is going to be the first major TikTok election," said Chuck Rocha, a former senior advisor to Bernie Sanders presidential campaign in 2020, who was the architect of his robust Latino vote program. "Any politician talking about not using TikTok is ignoring not only the youth vote, but increasingly the Latino youth vote, because that’s where they are consuming almost all of their communications.”

Harris Can Communicate to Young People that They're Being Listened To

Genesis Barron, 20, is the daughter of a Culinary Union member in Las Vegas, the powerful labor union that has influenced elections in Nevada for years, boosting Democrats statewide and nationally. She's a reminder that while many young people care about a host of progressive issues, they, like so many other Americans, see the state of the economy as both critical, and intensely personal.

"Employment rates are up, while less people are getting fired, and more people are being hired. Gas prices are down, while groceries are still a little bit rough, but they're slightly better," she said, before turning to how her friends are disconnected from many of the Washington policy fights and campaigns.

"They do care about politics and the state of where this country is going but my friends and the people around me are not really focused on politics too much right now," she said.

Barron was speaking after a fiery speech by Vice President Kamala Harris to the Culinary Union earlier this month, a validator at the top of the ticket the campaign is counting on to make the case to young Latino voters and other young voters of color across the country this year. The vice president in 2023 held events and spoke to media often aimed at Black and Latino constituencies, with a college tour that hit nine stops including historically black colleges and universities as well as Hispanic-serving institutions.

The administration previously told The Messenger this cross section of engagement with Black and Latino communities is intentional, including Telemundo and Univision interviews last year as well.

While Harris started the New Year in Las Vegas, with Nevada rising to the top of critical battleground states this year, a source close to the campaign told The Messenger more such trips to engage "with Latinos and young Latinos in Nevada and across the country" are planned soon.

It's a plan allies strongly support.

"When she was doing the college tour we had phenomenal turnout for her events, it's not just young people who love her, but particularly young Latinos and people of color," Mayer said. "If she brings that same energy, she's not just a phenomenal surrogate, but it communicates to young people that they are being listened to on the campaign."

The campaign is betting that it can build back its support among Hispanic men and young Latinos better than it was in 2020 to stop the drop in Democratic support from Hispanics since 2012 with this consistent level of outreach.

But one reason campaign sources and sources close to the re-elect believe Biden is well-positioned is because they say campaign manager Julie Chavez Rodriguez is empowered to prioritize Latino outreach.

They tell the previously unreported story of how she helped get a critical $1 million into Arizona during the final weeks of the campaign in October of 2020 to reach Latinos because the early Latino vote was lagging. The meeting included Chavez Rodriguez, Saenz, Barreto, and Jorge Neri, who brought similar calls for Latino mobilization needs from his meetings with local Democrats on the ground in Nevada. Chavez Rodriguez asked what they believed was needed and Saenz said he wanted to send extra mail to Latinos because the final poll of Latinos in Arizona was fine, but not extraordinary. As the campaign looked at the early vote in Latino heavy zip codes, it felt they were not getting as many ballots back yet as they needed.

After that meeting Chavez Rodriguez relayed the message to Jen O'Malley Dillon, the campaign manager at the time, which led to Arizona getting $1 million late for Latinos, and Nevada also getting endgame resources for Hispanic voter mobilization.

It's the kind of senior decision-making ability that could play a key role again in 2024, with the Brookings Institute writing last spring that Nevada and Arizona — states where young Latinos make up 40% of all newly eligible voters — were identified as swing states "where Latino youth participation in the 2020 election was decisive."

"Towards the end of the campaign there was a team of us working to make sure we did everything we could to turnout Latinos and we knew Arizona and Nevada and other areas were very important to us," said Jorge Neri, who is not currently with the campaign. "But for us having an advocate like Julie at headquarters understanding the bigger picture of why this investment was so important, when you see the margins, you can see how this investment had a direct impact on Biden's ability to win Arizona and Nevada."
Former President Donald Trump’s huge win in the Iowa caucuses on Monday enshrines one of the most astonishing comebacks in American political history.

Losing one-term presidents almost never mount subsequent successful primary campaigns, much less pull off landslides that demonstrate utter dominance of their party. Trump transformed the GOP in his populist, nationalist, nihilistic image in 2016. By claiming 50% of the vote in the biggest win in caucus history, putting him on course to his third consecutive nomination, he showed that eight years after his outsider presidential victory, the current GOP is entirely his party.

“The big night is going to be in November, when we take back our country,” Trump told his first proper victory party since he shocked the world by winning the 2016 election. His MAGA-hat wearing crowd greeted him with chants of “Trump, Trump, Trump” beneath two vast screens reading “Trump wins Iowa!”

But the ex-president’s rebound is more stunning for another reason. He won despite 91 criminal charges and other legal entanglements that threaten his freedom and his fortune. In a head-spinning snapshot of the unprecedented times, he’s expected to show up in a courtroom in Manhattan on Tuesday morning for the opening of a defamation trial.

His Iowa triumph came three years and nine days after he told a mob to “fight like hell” before it ransacked the US Capitol in an attempt to thwart the congressional certification of President Joe Biden ’s 2020 election win. Trump’s dominance on Monday night shows that among the most committed Republican voters, there is no price for him to pay for the worst attack on an election in modern history. In fact, his successful leveraging of his criminal plight to paint a narrative of persecution is the superpower that renewed his bond with GOP base voters and left his rivals with an impossible conundrum about how to exploit his liabilities.

His caucus victory also demonstrates the success of Trump’s election denial strategy, which has convinced millions of GOP voters of the false belief he was illegally ejected from power in 2020. For Americans who believe Biden’s warning that Trump is the “most anti-democratic president with a small ‘d’ in American history,” Monday night will have sown utter dread.

Trump’s vow to win a second term dedicated to “retribution” against his enemies, his labeling of political opponents as “vermin” and his warnings that immigrants are “poisoning the blood” of America, which are reminiscent of 1930s dictators, were no disqualification in Iowa. Instead, the president who attempted to overturn democracy to stay in power used democracy far more effectively than any of his Republican opponents to win an electoral endorsement from GOP voters who want him back in the White House.

Monday’s result posed huge questions for Trump’s rivals. Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis claimed second place, narrowly ahead of former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley. It is a showing that doesn’t offer DeSantis much hope of capturing the nomination, but may at least give him a rationale for staying in the race.

Haley came third but she is most focused on next week’s New Hampshire primary, where independent, undeclared voters and moderate Republicans offer her best chance to score an early win over Trump. But the electoral map of Iowa also illustrates the daunting task she faces in creating a path to the GOP nomination. In rural areas, where most Republicans live, she made little impression.

And while Haley and DeSantis proved there is a substantial constituency in the GOP for someone other than Trump, it’s not clear that it is large enough to defeat him, even if one of them were able to emerge as the sole alternative to the former president. While Trump was gracious to his opponents in his victory speech, there will be increasing pressure from his campaign for them to get out of the race so he can concentrate on Biden. Kari Lake, a staunch Trump supporter running for Senate in Arizona after refusing to recognize her 2022 gubernatorial loss, told reporters at his victory party that the other candidates couldn’t win and were running “vanity projects.”

The magnitude of Trump’s victory also makes it much harder for his distant rivals to claim any true momentum coming out of Iowa. “It’s not a race for second, it’s a race for relevancy and everyone is losing except for Donald Trump,” said Republican strategist Scott Jennings. “This Republican Party wants to give Donald Trump one more shot to prove them all wrong that everything was a witch hunt, that the election was rigged. … It’s obvious they want one more shot at it; it’s showing up in national polling and we are seeing it at these caucus sites.”

Iowa is only one state in a long nominating process. Votes cast in the caucuses represent a small proportion of the state’s population. But Trump’s dominance of rural voters in the state mirrors his support base across the country outside cities and suburbs. And polls suggest that his victory here can be replicated in most GOP bastions across the country.

Trump’s Iowa victory also sharpens the collision between the 2024 election and his legal imbroglio. His solidified status as a huge GOP front-runner increases the possibility that his party could nominate a convicted felon for president — an unheard-of-scenario — depending on the progress of his four looming criminal trials this year. The victor of the Iowa caucuses is expected in Manhattan on Tuesday morning for the opening of his defamation trial involving writer E. Jean Carroll, who has already been awarded $5 million in a separate trial after Trump was found liable for battery .

The former president’s dominance of Iowa also cements an impression that he is effectively running as an incumbent. To start with, many Republicans don’t believe he lost in 2020 and think he’s the rightful president, a theme Trump reinforced in his victory speech. And Trump’s aura and mastery of the GOP — recently demonstrated in his strong-arming of key party office holders for endorsements — has made it difficult for his rivals to take him on in a fair fight. That pseudo incumbency hugely helped Trump in Iowa, where he has leveraged relationships that he nurtured since he came second in the caucuses at the start of his shock rise to power in 2016.

During four years in the White House, Trump steered aid and attention the Hawkeye State’s way, constantly building political influence. The playbook is likely to work elsewhere, especially in the critical South Carolina primary that looms next month. CNN’s Manu Raju reported Monday that the ex-president is already pressuring one of the state’s senators, Tim Scott, for an endorsement as he seeks to effectively close out the nominating race early by crushing Haley on her own patch. Trump’s power is also underpinned by his campaign’s success in heading off any meaningful oversight from the Republican National Committee, which never made him pay a price for skipping campaign debates that it sanctioned. And Trump’s supporters now hold influence and power at every level of the Republican Party across the country. Many have taken legislative action in the wake of his false claims of fraud in 2020 that have made it harder to vote and easier to interfere in elections.

Yet while Trump’s effective incumbency is a huge factor, the fact he is out of power also allows him, paradoxically, to run as a candidate of change. The roles are reversed from 2020. Biden is the one in office and now has a more recent White House record than Trump’s to be judged on. But even when he was in the Oval Office, Trump never forgot that his magnetism among GOP voters lies in always being the outsider and a disruptor. His unhinged behavior, incessant shattering of rules and challenges to the law reinvigorated a brand perfectly tailored to Republican voters who despise “elites” in politics, government and the media. His uncouth language and politically incorrect jokes about the late Sen. John McCain and former President Jimmy Carter, who is in hospice care, only reinforce the impression he says what many of his supporters think.

In a flash of self-awareness, Trump explained his political method when he told North Dakota Gov. Doug Burgum, who endorsed him after his failed 2024 campaign, “You need controversy for traction sometimes.” In recent days, DeSantis has tried to position Trump as the “establishment.” But it’s a hopeless strategy: even when the front-runner was the head of the US government and his portrait was on the wall of every US government office and embassy, he was a scourge of the establishment.

Trump’s win makes the long theoretical prospect that he could win the White House a far more direct possibility. Barring some unforeseen event, his dominance in Iowa shows the extreme difficulty any of his remaining rivals will have of keeping him off the Republican ticket. And recent polls have shown him highly competitive and even ahead of Biden in the handful of swing states that will decide the destiny of the White House. In a nation split down the middle, the election will be close whatever happens. It may concern Democrats that while Trump hasn’t toned down the unhinged wildness of his public appearances, his victory in Iowa was the first validation of a far more professional political operation than he deployed in either the 2016 or 2020 elections.

Still, the Biden campaign, beset by growing concern among Democrats about the president’s reelection prospects, has argued that a big victory for Trump in Iowa would begin to awaken Americans who rejected him in 2020 of the real danger that he could recapture the White House. While Trump was strong even in suburban areas around Des Moines, this may not translate into a similar performance among more moderate voters in corresponding areas in less conservative states. Trump’s deficit among this group nationwide cost him the 2020 election.

Trump’s triumph will also reverberate around the world, and force US allies to confront the possibility that the most antagonistic president in modern history, who cozied up to dictators and spurned America’s traditional friends in democratic nations, could soon be back.

European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde sounded the alarm on France 2 television last week. “If we are to draw lessons from history, as in the way he managed the four years of his mandate, it is clearly a threat,” she said.

A return to office for Trump could represent an existential danger to NATO, which helped keep peace in Europe through the Cold War and into the 21st century. Trump’s victory will also give Russian President Vladimir Putin another reason to prolong the bloody war in Ukraine. Trump said Monday he’d get Putin in a room with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky, an encounter that could only end on terms unfavorable to the Ukrainians.

For more CNN news and newsletters create an account at CNN.com
WASHINGTON — Though the Republican presidential primaries and caucuses haven't started yet, former President Donald Trump’s commanding lead in the polls has already spurred debate over potential running mates.

Some names being floated are lawmakers who’ve said in interviews they would be interested in the job. Other names are generated when Trump meets with a high-profile supporter, which happened this week when he was spotted at Mar-a-Lago with Rep, Elise Stefanik, R-N.Y., according to aides.

But his aides add that stories about an array of possible appointments − from running mate to White House chief of staff − are premature at best.

Start the day smarter. Get all the news you need in your inbox each morning.

"Second term policy priorities and staffing decisions will not - in no uncertain terms - be led by anonymous or thinly sourced speculation in mainstream media news stories,” the Trump campaign said in a statement. "President Trump is solely focused on winning the Republican nomination for president."

Trump himself said in an interview with NBC in September that he hasn’t thought too much about the role but added he “likes the concept” of a woman as vice president.

"We're going to choose the best person," he said.

Either way, numerous political experts said loyalty would be a prime consideration for Trump as he chooses his running mate. And some of his supporters being floated as a running mate could very well end up on Trump’s ticket.

Here’s a look at some potential contenders.

South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott, who dropped out of the presidential race last month, was floated as a potential running mate early on in the primary race. Unlike some of his rivals, the lawmaker did not criticize Trump directly when he was on the campaign trail.

Scott worked on opportunity zones − a bipartisan initiative − in Trump's 2017 tax cut legislation. He is also 58 and Black, which would be key for Trump as he seeks to expand his coalition of supporters.

Trump was asked on Fox News ' "Sunday Morning Futures" whether he would choose Scott as a running mate in July, and said he thinks Scott is a “very good guy” and talented.

“We did opportunity zones together. It's never been talked about. It's one of the most successful economic development things ever done in this country. And Tim is very good,” Trump said. “I mean, I could see Tim doing something with the administration.”

Though Scott said he wouldn’t endorse anyone for the primary, he did defend Trump’s economic record and acknowledged his poll numbers in an interview with CNBC earlier this month.

Rep. Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., has argued that former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley would be a good pick for Trump’s vice president as she would pull independent voters to his circle of supporters.

Haley, 51, worked in the Trump administration as an ambassador to the United Nations from 2017 to 2018, where she supported U.S. relations with Israel and led the initiative to pull the U.S. out of the Paris Agreement on climate change. As a woman of color, she would diversify Trump’s ticket.

"A large gender gap exists in his current polling and attempting to reach out to more moderate suburban female voters in swing states will be crucially important in the general election,” said Aaron Kall, an elections expert at the University of Michigan. “Given the advanced ages of Trump and Biden, selecting a younger candidate could help alleviate any concerns over health.”

Having Haley on Trump’s ticket might also increase his chances of beating Biden. Numerous polls have found that Haley has a higher chance of winning against Biden in a hypothetical matchup than other Republican candidates.

But when asked by a voter in Iowa this month whether she would consider being Trump’s number two, she made clear she wouldn’t accept the position.

“I don't play for second," she said. "I've never played for second my entire life."

The two have also battled on the campaign trail. Haley said that Trump is not the right president for the country in 2024. The Trump campaign has called Haley "birdbrain," and sent a birdcage and bird food to her hotel room in October to mock her.

South Dakota Gov. Kristi Noem, one of Trump’s fiercest allies, is also being floated after she endorsed the former president at an event in September. Trump said in an interview with NBC that same month he has his eye on Noem as a potential running mate.

“I think she’s fantastic. She’s been a great governor. She gave me a very full-throated endorsement - a beautiful endorsement actually,” Trump said. “And, you know, it’s been a very good state for me and certainly she’d be one of the people I’d consider.”

Noem, 52, has also made clear she is interested in the position, saying in an interview with Newmax in September she would consider the role “in a heartbeat.”

She’s criticized Trump’s criminal indictments and the Colorado Supreme Court’s ruling to disqualify Trump from the state’s presidential primary ballot this week. She’s also passed anti-abortion and pro-Second Amendment policies. Before she was governor, Noem served in Congress where she helped pass the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 − key legislation under the Trump administration.

Arkansas Gov. Sarah Huckabee Sanders, 41, is another lawmaker Trump could potentially choose. Sanders endorsed Trump at a rally in Miami, Florida, last month, calling him “my former boss, my friend, and everybody’s favorite president.”

Sanders served as the White House press secretary in the Trump administration from 2017 to 2019, advising him on personnel, policy and communications strategy, according to her website. When Sanders stepped down from her position, Trump acknowledged in a news conference that the pair have been through a lot together and that she did an incredible job.

“She’s tough and she’s good,” Trump said.

If 2024 does end up being a match between President Joe Biden and Trump, Sanders would serve as a key player for Trump. She delivered a combative response against Biden when he delivered his State of the Union address in February, saying Biden’s weakness puts the nation and world at risk.

However, allegations that her office illegally altered public records could make a comeback if she ends up on the ticket.

Ben Carson, who served as the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in the Trump administration, said he would be willing to serve as Trump’s running mate when the former president ran in 2016.

Ultimately, Trump chose former Vice President Mike Pence for the spot. But Carson’s name is now being floated again after the retired neurosurgeon endorsed him for the 2024 race.

If Carson were chosen however, it is unclear whether he would take the spot.

When Carson announced he would leave after Trump’s first term, he was pressed in a 2019 Newsmax interview on whether he would be interested in serving in a second Trump administration. Carson said, “I would be interested in returning to the private sector, because I think you have just as much influence — maybe more — there.”

Staunch Trump supporter Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene, R-Ga., told the Atlanta-Journal Constitution in August that it would be an “honor” if she was chosen for the vice president spot and would consider it “very, very heavily.”

She’s spoken at numerous Trump campaign events and was one of the 147 Republicans who voted to decertify the 2020 election results.

Greene also supports an impeachment inquiry against Biden - joining other Republican lawmakers in alleging Biden was involved in his family's business dealings as vice president - and accused him of treason, while defending Trump against his indictments.

However, Greene’s far-right stances and rhetoric might not bode well for Trump if he is seeking to attract moderate Republicans to his base.

Rumors about Rep. Elise Stefanik, R-N.Y., being a possible running mate for Trump have also been floated, as she is one of the former president’s fiercest allies.

She endorsed Trump last year before he announced he was running. The endorsement came after the midterm elections, when some Republicans were blaming him for failing to generate a red wave, according to The Associated Press.

Stefanik has also criticized his indictments and filed ethics complaints with judges who have overseen cases related to the former president.

She is 39 and could appeal to younger women looking to back the former president. However, she is from New York, which has voted blue in recent presidential elections.

"Electoral considerations are often at play in Vice-Presidential selections, so someone who could help Republicans flip a state like Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin, Nevada, Georgia, or Arizona could be especially helpful," Kall previously told USA TODAY.

Though former Arizona gubernatorial candidate Kari Lake launched a Senate bid in October, there's some speculation that she could land higher office as Trump’s potential running mate.

Lake, 54, has defended Trump against his criminal indictments and spread allegations that the 2020 election was stolen - despite evidence to the contrary.

She came out first in a poll conducted by the Conservative Political Action Conference in March that asked voters who they would like to see as the Republican candidate for vice president. Lake won 20% of the vote, topping the other candidates on the list.

However, she did lose the governor’s race in the midterms last year which could affect whether she has enough political standing to pull in more supporters to Trump’s circle.

Though businessman and self-proclaimed outsider Vivek Ramaswamy is competing for the Republican nomination, he has defended Trump numerous times on the campaign trail and acknowledged Trump was the best president of the 21st century.

Trump has also taken notice of Ramaswamy’s efforts, crowning him the winner of the first Republican debate in August.

"He's a very, very, very intelligent person. He's got good energy, and he could be some form of something. I tell you, I think he'd be very good,” Trump said in August when asked by conservative host Glenn Beck what he thought of Ramaswamy as vice president.

However, Ramaswamy has no political experience, and he said he wasn't interested in playing for second place in an interview.

“Donald Trump and I share something in common and that is that neither of us would do well in a number 2 position,” he said on Fox News in August.

This article originally appeared on USA TODAY: Who would Trump choose as vice president? Here's a list of potential candidates
The 2024 election cycle has kicked off, and the race is heating up even as Election Day is months away .

President Joe Biden is seeking another term in the White House, and with former President Donald Trump's hat also in the ring, a 2020 rematch is a real possibility. Democrats are expected to fall firmly behind Biden, and Trump has held a stubborn lead in polls on the Republican side despite several high-profile candidates aiming to unseat him.

Here are the latest developments on the path to the 2024 election:

Start the day smarter. Get all the news you need in your inbox each morning.

Biden remains a strong frontrunner for his party's nomination. Several lesser-known Democratic candidates are mounting challenges to the president, but they have yet to gain much traction.

Background: First elected in 1972 , Biden served as a senator from Delaware for 36 years before being elected vice president in 2008, mounting a victory alongside former President Barack Obama. After serving two terms as vice president, he took a brief hiatus from government work before returning to run, and win, in 2020.

Views: Biden's campaign is focused on the "battle for the soul of America," doubling down on the central message of his campaign four years ago. He said the question facing the nation is "whether, in the years ahead, we have more freedom or less freedom, more rights or fewer."

Background: Phillips represents Minnesota in the House of Representatives and was first elected to Congress in 2018. Before entering politics, Phillips made his name as a businessman, heading up Phillips Distilling and serving as chair of Talenti Gelato.

His views: Phillips is a moderate with a reputation in Washington for reaching across the aisle. A member of the Problem Solvers Caucus , one of his major legislative accomplishments was the creation of the Paycheck Protection Program , which he co-authored with Texas Republican Rep. Chip Roy. The program provided loans to businesses to help them during the economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Background: Williamson is a self-help author and spiritual leader who ran unsuccessfully for president in 2020.

Her views: Williamson supports abortion rights, a single-payer health care system and reparations for descendants of formerly enslaved Americans. She has suggested creating a U.S. Department of Children and Youth to increase child advocacy and a U.S. Department of Peace.

Since his win in 2016, Trump has served as de facto leader of the Republican Party, his influence still looming large in Washington. However, after Trump-endorsed candidates suffered in the 2022 midterms, and amid concerns around his age as well, speculation swirled that there was an opening for a new leader to rise. Here are the candidates who have thrown their hat in the ring.

Background: Binkley is CEO, president, and co-founder of the mergers and acquisitions conglomerate Generational Group. He is also a faith leader, co-founding and serving as the pastor at Create Church in Richardson, Texas.

His views: Binkley has said he hopes to prioritize balancing the budget, lowering health care costs, creating bipartisan immigration reform and putting more community emphasis on education. Binkley is against abortion rights. His campaign website says he was "thankful" when the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, but that a "culture of life" means prioritizing adoption as well.

Background: Haley started her political career in South Carolina's state legislature, where she served for 6 years before mounting a successful campaign for the governor's office in 2010. In 2016, former President Donald Trump nominated Haley to be U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, a position she held for a year before unexpectedly stepping down in 2018.

Her views: Haley opposes abortion rights and has been a vocal supporter of Israel in its ongoing war with Hamas. While on the campaign trail, she has focused on illegal immigration, advocating for a return of the Trump-era "Remain in Mexico" policy as well as the defunding of sanctuary cities. Haley has told voters she hopes to crack down on China's influence on the U.S. economy. She has supported Trump in the past but also criticized him after the Jan. 6, 2021, Capitol attack.

Background: Prior to 2016, Trump dabbled in politics, often sounding off on issues like the birther movement meant to cast doubt on former President Barack Obama's citizenship and the case surrounding the now-exonerated Central Park Five. However, he was still primarily known for real estate and his forays into reality television, famously starring in "The Apprentice."

In 2016, Trump won the White House, serving a full four-year term before being defeated by Biden in his reelection bid.

His views: The former president has, without evidence, centered much of his campaign on the claim that his political enemies are fueling his ongoing criminal cases. He has said he would consider pardoning participants in the Jan. 6, 2021, Capitol riot, which his critics say was inspired by his false claims of election fraud.

The potential of a tight Trump-Biden rematch opens the door for a third-party candidate to be integral in determining the results of the race. A third name on the presidential ballot could drain votes from either of the two major party nominees, tipping the scales toward either Biden or Trump.

Background: Kennedy is an environmental lawyer known for trumpeting a debunked theory that vaccines can be linked to autism. In 2017, Trump invited Kennedy to head up a presidential commission on vaccine safety.

His views: He is campaigning on a platform of fighting for the "liberties guaranteed by the Constitution ," according to his campaign website. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Kennedy opposed vaccine mandates, calling them an infringement on individual liberty and at times used the Holocaust as a historical comparison .

Background: West is an American academic and philosopher known for his progressive ideals. He has taught at several Ivy League institutions and works now as a professor of philosophy at Union Theological Seminary.

His views: West is a proponent of establishing Medicare for All, and barring oil and gas subsidies, as well as drilling on public lands. Long a vocal opponent of militarism, West's campaign website lists "end the wars" as a key priority, which would include disbanding NATO and banning nuclear weapons across the globe.

Background: Stein is a doctor and organizer who has championed causes like campaign finance reform and environmental protection. She has run for president twice before, launching bids in 2012 and 2016.

Her views: Stein paints herself as an outsider, coming in to disrupt a political system ruled by money and special interests. In her campaign launch video, posted to X , she called for an economic bill of rights including "the right to a job, to health care, to housing, to food, education and more.

This article originally appeared on USA TODAY: Who is running for president? Get to know the 2024 presidential candidates.
The 2024 campaign year for President Joe Biden’s inner circle will largely be about carefully ratcheting up the intensity against Donald Trump , wary of voters becoming dulled to what they expect to be the former president’s ever wilder rhetoric and promises about what he would do if back in power.

Or, as some of the younger aides on Biden’s reelection campaign have been grimly joking, it’s about when to go “full Hitler” – when the leading Republican candidate’s speeches and actions go so far that the Biden team goes all the way to a direct comparison to the Nazi leader rather than couching their attacks by saying Trump “parroted” him .

The campaign so far, these aides believe, has essentially been Biden running against himself, and losing – with his approval ratings under 40%, anxiety about his age and the Democratic divide over his handling of the war the Israel-Hamas war. But they see the next few weeks of the Republican primary campaigns as an opportunity to persuade influencers and media into thinking about the race on their terms.

“You have this moment in the first quarter where he is continuing to go full MAGA extremist now in order to shore up support in his own base,” a senior campaign aide told CNN about Trump, asking for anonymity to discuss internal strategy. “While he may be successful in that effort, if we do our job, we’ll point out that everything he’s saying is extreme and unpopular.”

Biden campaign aides will be doing that as White House aides finalize the president’s State of the Union address, expected for early February, aiming to capitalize on his largest national audience of the year to lay out an agenda that he can quickly take out on the campaign trail – including protecting Obamacare, expanding efforts to relieve student debt and housing costs, and tax measures such as a 25% minimum tax for billionaires and quadrupling the stock buyback tax.

And while official campaigning beyond fundraising events is still months away for Biden, events are being planned to conveniently take the president to battleground states for official speeches about his accomplishments.

But Democratic allies have been eager to hear Biden make more of a case for himself – and for a second term – now. Ask many Democratic members of Congress to identify what Biden’s second term agenda is and they admit they’re stumped. They tend to fall back on insisting that Democrats just have to do better talking about what they’ve done. Some go with “finish the job,” the pat slogan from Biden’s campaign launch that even he has all but abandoned.

To Rep. Steven Horsford, who chairs the Congressional Black Caucus and was an early Biden supporter in the 2020 race, part of the pitch needs to be making the anti-Trump argument feel immediate, and not academic – but he does not think that will be anywhere near enough. The Nevada Democrat has met with White House and reelection campaign leaders – including top Biden adviser Anita Dunn – to press them into moving off using “Bidenomics,” arguing that the phrase is too centered on the president rather than on appealing to voters.

Horsford said that even though Biden does not have significant primary opposition, the fact that voting is about to start means he is overdue in laying out a clearer second-term agenda: “It’s time to talk about it.”

Though multiple people involved tell CNN that many campaign operations remain bottlenecked, in the White House and in Wilmington, aides insist that interlocking plans have been taking shape for months. They push back on top donors, who griped to aides gathered at a pricey DC hotel in mid-December that the campaign does not seem to have a strategy beyond waiting to respond to Trump – and that it does not have a strategy at all if another candidate grabs the nomination. And they dismiss the many advocates and members of Congress who say they cannot pinpoint specifics about Biden’s agenda for a second term.

To kick off the year, Biden will spend the anniversary of the January 6, 2021, attack on the US Capitol in Philadelphia. And Vice President Kamala Harris will kick off a national tour talking about abortion rights in Wisconsin on January 22, the anniversary of the Roe v. Wade decision, in what Democrats believe will be a defining theme of the campaign.

Meanwhile, leaders of the campaign to write Biden in for the New Hampshire primary on January 23 – where he opted not to be on the ballot because of a technical dispute – tell CNN they expect a cavalcade of Democrats with future presidential ambitions to start appearing on his behalf there.

If Trump does become the Republican nominee, Biden aides say they will capitalize on the unique situation of a former president trying to return to the White House by putting the spotlight on parts of his record they believe voters find repulsive, as well as on promises he failed to deliver on in office. The word “receipts” comes up a lot. And if another of the Republicans emerges, Biden and his aides will argue that candidate is indistinguishable from Trump in allegiance to what the president likes to call MAGA Republican extremism.

“There’s zero distance between these folks on the insane and dangerous worldview for which they’re advocating,” the senior campaign aide said. “Our ability to develop a contrast does not change based on who has the nomination at this point.”

Former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley’s fumbled answer about slavery as the cause of the Civil War, these aides argue, is the latest demonstration of how even the purported leading Trump alternative can be lumped in as another MAGA Republican.

Still, with primary polls convincing Biden aides that Trump is almost certain to be the nominee, a top priority for them will be urging Americans – and particularly mainstream media outlets – to see 2024, which is already packed with Trump legal dates stemming from 91 criminal charges, not as a “trial of the century” and Trump circus. Instead, they want people to see what Biden has taken to calling an “inflection point” election, with glaringly different visions for the presidency and the future in front of the country.

“(Trump) does take up a lot of oxygen right now. But most of that oxygen right now is about the stakes for him – what may or may not happen to Donald Trump, and very little about how that is going to impact the American people,” the senior campaign aide said. “We have to make sure it’s about the harm he’s going to inflict on the American people.”

Though Biden aides expect to spend some time contrasting the characters of the candidates – for example, they point to Biden’s Christmas message quoting Scripture and Trump’s listing off people who should “rot in hell” – they say their main focus won’t be on Trump’s behavior, but on his record as president and what he is saying he will do if president again.

They believe they have even more opportunity for point-to-point comparisons with Biden’s record of accomplishing things Trump said he would do, including passing a bipartisan infrastructure bill that has started hundreds of new projects, cutting drug prices and creating jobs.

Or there are the Trump tax cuts, which the Biden campaign marked the sixth anniversary of just before Christmas. “Americans were presented with and sold a version of what this bill could accomplish, and the economy and middle-class families received something very different,” Brian Deese, Biden’s first director of the National Economic Council, said in a call with reporters, adding later that the promise that the tax cuts would pay for themselves was “unrealistic at the point it was uttered, and it has not been what has come to pass.”

White House deputy chief of staff Bruce Reed pointed to recent events when Biden has asked audience members to raise their hands if they think the tax code is fair. Going into 2024, Reed said, Biden “really wants to have a national debate on tax fairness.”

Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the leading progressive from New York, said addressing economic issues is crucial but urged Biden not to get cornered into only talking about that.

“This is not just about reducing costs and tackling inflation for everyday Americans, but also having a bigger vision on climate, health care,” she said.

Some of the heat is off Biden, Ocasio-Cortez argued, since he can point to action he wanted but that Congress has not supported to make the argument that Democrats should control more House and Senate seats.

“Right now is still a great opportunity to clarify, deepen and also revive a lot of that,” Ocasio-Cortez told CNN, because “we have to win these elections to make it happen.”

Joel Benenson – a top adviser to the 2016 Hillary Clinton campaign, which did not succeed in getting voters to see Trump as toxic and out of sync with American values – compared the task ahead for the Biden campaign to writing a symphony that does not fade into background noise.

“You certainly don’t want to dump it all at once – you want to create this cacophony that he can’t escape from,” Benenson told CNN.

Policy proposals for any incumbent president running for reelection tend to be driven out of the White House. For Biden, with the same top advisers directing both the West Wing and the campaign, that is even more true.

Maybe they will even pass some bills, Biden advisers say, insisting that the unexpected wins they scored in the summer of 2022 could be a model for how the pressure of looming elections gets Congress to act. More likely, though, they will be shaming Congress for not doing more, both on his more partisan agenda and the “unity agenda” they say will once again be in this year’s State of the Union. Biden will call on Republicans and Democrats to finally act on issues they should be able to agree on: tackling the fentanyl crisis, increasing assistance for veterans, addressing mental health, expanding data privacy and searching for a cure for cancer.

Biden will also be hoping for moments like those in 2023’s speech when he got Republicans to applaud as he demanded no cuts to Medicare and Social Security, or when Georgia GOP Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene stood up in a jacket with white furry trim to shout “Liar!” – both of which Biden aides said afterward were not rehearsed, but delighted them by how much they seemed to work to the president’s benefit.

Reed, who oversees much of the domestic policy agenda in the White House, told CNN that the mentality going into 2024 is to think simultaneously about executing a year-four agenda and setting up a second-term agenda, despite a January defined by converging congressional stalemates over providing more aid to Ukraine and Israel, addressing the surging migrant crisis at the border, and preventing yet another government shutdown.

“We have a lot we hope to get done this year, and much more to do in the years ahead,” Reed said.

While he and others on the government payroll won’t respond to or attempt to bracket Trump directly, Reed said, certain events and statements from the Republican candidates will continue to drive official responses and proposals from Biden.

“The president will continue to show that he’s the president for all Americans, and he will continue to do everything in his power to unite the country and restore the soul of the country,” Reed said. “That means standing up to divisive extreme policies as well as divisive, hateful rhetoric.”

For more CNN news and newsletters create an account at CNN.com


Russia's war against Ukraine has not diminished the Kremlin's desire to interfere in the 2024 United States presidential elections, as reported by CNN.

The Director of the United States National Security Agency, Paul Nakasone, said that despite the exhaustive war against Ukraine, Russia still has the capability to meddle in the U.S. presidential elections.

"This is an important year for them. They are looking at this [US election] and I would anticipate, with the challenge that they have in Ukraine, this is obviously where they want make an impact," he said.

FBI Director Chris Ray echoed Nakasone's statement, noting that Russia's attention on Ukraine has increased its desire to shape the perception of the United States. He emphasized the deep significance of U.S. policy for their entirely unprovoked and offensive invasion of Ukraine.

Sean Newell, a high-ranking representative of the U.S. Department of Justice for cybersecurity, added that Russian intelligence agencies' focus on Ukraine has benefited the United States.

"All the [Russian] intelligence services that we investigate on a daily basis for activity targeting the United States are now devoting time and attention to Ukraine for obvious reasons," Newell said.

However, he added that Russian intelligence continues to look for ways to influence the U.S. support for Ukraine. Both Nakasone and Wray expressed confidence in the ability to secure the election thanks to “exponentially more sophisticated” cooperation between the national security and cyber agencies, as well as the private sector, but acknowledged the foreign adversaries are also improving their capabilities.

The U.S. intelligence officials identified Russia, China, and Iran as primary actors seeking to interfere in the U.S. elections. The FBI Director highlighted that China's hacker army is larger than the combined armies of all major countries and is 50 times larger than what is at his disposal. Nakasone agreed that the U.S. may not match China in hacker numbers but possesses a qualitative advantage.

American presidential elections

The upcoming U.S. presidential elections are scheduled for November 5, 2024.

Predictions suggest that the Democratic candidate will be the incumbent U.S. leader, Joe Biden, and the Republican candidate will be former U.S. President Donald Trump. However, on December 28, 2023, the head of the Maine State Electoral Commission, Shenna Bilouz, excluded Trump from the election ballot for 2024, citing the 14th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution which prohibits participation in elections by organizers and participants in an insurrection, recognizing the Capitol riot by Trump supporters on January 6, 2021.

On December 20, the Colorado Supreme Court also barred Trump from participating in primaries in the state through the 14th Amendment. Trump's team appealed this decision to the U.S. Supreme Court.

It was later revealed that 34 states in the U.S. initiated the procedure to exclude Trump from the presidential election ballots.
The 2024 presidential election could be a rematch of the 2020 presidential election. In that presidential race, Joe Biden defeated Donald Trump to take the White House.

National polls of registered voters continue to show a close hypothetical race for the 2024 election between the two potential candidates.

What Happened: President Biden and former President Trump have been the frontrunners for the Democratic and Republican parties, respectively, ahead of the 2024 election for many months.

Trump won the Iowa caucus Monday night to jump out in the early lead for the nod for the GOP nomination in the 2024 presidential election.

Trending: Pakistan Warns Iran Of 'Serious Consequences' After Accusing Tehran Of Violating Airspace And Killing 2 C

Must Read: New York Knicks Owner Faces Lawsuit, Could Legal Troubles Lead To Sale Of NBA Team? Madison Square Garden Sports Could Excite Sports Fans, Investors

Trump won the state of Iowa with 51% of the vote, earning 20 delegates in the Republican primary race. Ron DeSantis ranked second with 21.2% of the vote, earning nine delegates. Nikki Haley ranked third with 19.1% of the vote and eight delegates.

Along with winning the Iowa caucus, Trump continues to lead in most national polls of Republican voters. The most recent Morning Consult poll showed Trump with a record 57-point lead and a record 69% support.

While Trump held a lead of 50 points or more over his Republican opposition in several consecutive weeks, the former president has been neck and neck in a hypothetical matchup against Biden.

The weekly Morning Consult poll asked registered voters who they would select in a hypothetical matchup of Trump vs. Biden.

In this week's poll, Trump received 43% of the vote and Biden received 41% of the vote. Eleven percent selected Someone Else and 5% selected Don't Know.

This marked a gain of one percentage point for Trump from the previous week and a decline of two percentage points for Biden from the previous week. The poll resulted in a three-point swing for Trump to retake the lead.

The important Independent voters, who could decide the election, selected their 2024 pick as the following, with last week's results in parentheses:

Joe Biden: 31% (31%)

Donald Trump: 37% (38%)

Someone Else: 22% (21%)

Don't Know: 10% (10%)

Trump lost one percentage point among the Independent voters, while Biden's support remained the same.

The poll found that 87% of Republicans selected Trump for the hypothetical 2024 poll, which was up one percentage point from last week's results. The poll also found that 85% of voters who voted for Trump in the 2020 election are backing him again, which was down two percentage points from last week's results.

In the latest poll, 82% of Democratic voters selected Biden, which was down two percentage points from last week's poll. The poll also found that 81% of voters who backed Biden in the 2020 election are backing him again in the poll, which is in line with the previous week.

Related Link: 2024 Win For President Joe Biden Or Donald Trump Would Be ‘Threatening’ For Markets, Ray Dalio Says

Why It's Important: After retaking a lead in last week's poll for the first time in weeks, Biden falls behind Trump in the poll of nationally registered voters.

Over the past 16 weeks, Biden was tied with Trump five times, ahead of the former president four times and ranked behind the former president seven times.

Before the past four months, Biden posted a lead of one to two percentage points in almost all polls dating back to when polling began in December.

A big concern that remains for Biden could be what was listed as the top issue for voters ahead of the 2024 election in the Morning Consult poll. Voters selected the economy as the top concern, ranking ahead of national security and healthcare.

The economy being a major concern could be worrisome to Biden's campaign and the Democrats with consumers feeling the effects of higher inflation leading to higher prices for goods and services. Some have blamed Biden for not doing enough to help consumers who are struggling with higher prices and living expenses.

Biden recently highlighted the all-time highs for the stock market in a campaign video, which drew the attention of voters and Trump. While stock market indexes are at all-time highs, it comes with high inflation and after 2022, saw a large market drop.

The S&P 500 gained 37.4% during Biden's first year in office, which was the best one-year market return under a president since President Harry Truman in 1945.

In 2022, the S&P 500 experienced a decline of over 19%, representing the largest annual drop since 2008.

Benzinga recently shared the SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (NYSE:SPY), which tracks the S&P 500 Index, is up 23.7% since Biden assumed the presidency. The return over the last nearly two years would represent an average yearly gain of around 11.9%.

During Trump's four years as president, the S&P 500 had average annual gains of 14.5%. The SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust was up a total of around 67% during the four years under Trump, making it one of the best four-year returns for the S&P 500 in recent history.

Although Biden can point to higher stock market prices and record peaks during his tenure, the stock market's overall performance and annual average returns under Trump still surpassed those during Biden's time in office.

As the 2024 presidential election approaches, the economy and stock market returns are likely to become key topics of discussion. If the economy remains the key issue for voters for the 2024 election, the past results may tip the scales in Trump's favor.

Read Next: Why Buy Stocks In A Presidential Election Year? History Has A Crazy Stat For You

Photo: Shutterstock

© 2024 Benzinga.com. Benzinga does not provide investment advice. All rights reserved.

This article Trump Vs. Biden: Former President Retakes Lead In 2024 Election Poll, But Sees Lower Support From Independent Voters originally appeared on Benzinga.com .















S
h
o
u
l
d
 
D
o
n
a
l
d
 
T
r
u
m
p
 
w
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
2
0
2
4
 
P
r
e
s
i
d
e
n
t
i
a
l
 
E
l
e
c
t
i
o
n
,
 
w
e
 
c
o
u
l
d
 
e
x
e
c
t
 
t
h
a
t
 
h
i
s
 
a
d
m
i
n
i
s
t
r
a
t
i
o
n
 
w
o
u
l
d
 
l
i
k
e
l
y
 
p
u
r
s
u
e
 
p
o
l
i
c
i
e
s
 
s
u
c
h
 
a
s
 
t
a
x
 
c
u
t
s

,
 
d
e
r
e
g
u
l
a
t
i
o
n
,
 
a
n
d
 
a
 
h
a
r
d
l
i
n
e
 
s
t
a
n
c
e
 
o
n
 
i
m
m
i
g
r
a
t
i
o
n
.
 
T
h
e
r
e
 
m
i
g
h
t
 
a
l
s
o
 
b
e
 
a
 
r
e
f
o
c
u
s
 
o
n
 
"
A
m
e
r
i
c
a
 
F
i
r
s
t
"
 
f
o
r
e
i
g
n
 
p
o
l
i
c
y
,
 
a
 
p
o
s
s
i
b
l
e
 
r
e
n
e
g
o
t
i
a
t
i
o
n
 
o
r
 
w
i
t
h
d
r
a
w
a
l
 
f
r
o
m
 
c
e
r
t
a
i
n
 
i
n
t
e
r
n
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
a
g
r
e
e
m
e
n
t
s
,
 
a
n
d
 
r
e
v
i
s
i
t
i
n
g
 
r
o
l
l
m
e
n
t
s
 
a
n
d
 
p
o
l
i
c
i
e
s
 
o
n
 
c
l
i
m
a
t
e
 
c
h
a
n
g
e
.
 
D
o
m
e
s
t
i
c
a
l
l
y
,
 
t
h
e
r
e
 
c
o
u
l
d
 
b
e
 
c
h
a
n
g
e
s
 
i
n
 
e
d
u
c
a
t
i
o
n,
 
h
e
a
l
t
h
c
a
r
e
,
 
a
n
d
 
s
o
c
i
a
l
 
p
o
l
i
c
y
.
 
T
h
e
 
S
u
p
r
e
m
e
 
C
o
u
r
t
 
a
p
p
o
i
n
t
m
e
n
t
s
 
u
n
d
e
r
 
h
i
s
 
t
e
n
u
r
e
 
c
o
u
l
d
 
h
a
v
e
 
a
 
l
o
n
g
-
t
e
r
m
 
i
m
p
a
c
t
 
o
n
 
A
m
e
r
i
c
a
n
 
j
u
r
i
s
p
r
u
d
e
n
c
e
.
 
I
t
 
i
s
 
a
l
s
o
 
p
o
s
s
i
b
l
e
 
t
h
a
t
 
w
e
 
w
i
l
l
 
s
e
e
 
a
 
m
o
r
e
 
c
o
m
b
a
t
i
v
e
 
a
p
p
r
o
a
c
h
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
m
e
d
i
a
 
a
n
d
 
a
 
d
i
g
i
t
a
l
 
e
n
g
a
g
e
m
e
n
t
 
s
t
r
a
t
e
g
y
 
t
h
a
t
 
c
h
a
l
l
e
n
g
e
s
 
c
o
n
v
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
n
a
r
r
a
t
i
v
e
s
.
















The Future of America with a Second Trump Term: Speculations and Consequences

The question posed suggests a speculative scenario in which former President Donald Trump wins the 2024 Presidential Election. This query's emergence likely owes itself to the current political climate marked by a notable polarization and the looming presence of Trump in national discourse even after his term. 


Should Trump secure a victory in the next presidential race, America could witness a political environment that is both deeply contentious and transformative. From domestic policies to international diplomacy, a second term would empower Trump to advance his agenda with a vigor informed by his previous tenure and a Republican Party potentially strengthened in Congress. 


Considering Trump's policy preferences during his first term, a renewed focus on deregulation, particularly within the energy sector and environmental protections, could be prominent. Financial markets might initially react positively to a Trump win, as his business-friendly policies are generally favored by investors. Tax cuts and efforts to promote manufacturing within the United States could also see a resurgence. 


On the international front, Trump's "America First" doctrine might lead to more efforts to renegotiate trade agreements and seek more favorable terms for the U.S. Relations with NATO and other traditional allies could be strained, and the approach to adversaries such as North Korea and Iran might see significant shifts. 


Immigration would almost certainly remain a central issue, with Trump likely to reinstate stricter policies and continue his pursuit of border security measures like the construction of a border wall. Health care might also feature heavily, with potential further dismantlements of the Affordable Care Act. 


Trump's second term could exacerbate divisions on social issues. His administration would possibly take a conservative stance on women's reproductive rights, LGBTQ rights, and race relations, potentially rolling back progressive policies enacted between his terms. 


Judicial appointments in a second Trump term could solidify conservative control over the judiciary, particularly if any vacancies arise in the Supreme Court. This could impact American society for decades through decisions affecting all facets of governance and civil liberties. 


A Trump comeback, expectedly, would not be without its opposition. It would likely catalyze fervent activism and organization among liberals and progressives pushing back against policies they contend are regressive. 


It is vital to acknowledge that these outcomes are speculative, predicated on the premise of a political repeat. They are extrapolations based on prior actions and articulated policy positions by Trump and his administration. The demands and complexities of the presidency, alongside the inherent unpredictability of global events, could alter or redirect the course of a second Trump presidency in unforeseen ways.

As America looks toward 2024, the prospect of a Trump victory embodies just one possibility amid a host of potential political futures, each of which would uniquely shape the trajectory of the nation and its role on the world stage.















