What if Trump wins the 2024 Presidential Election?















Former President Donald Trump on Tuesday defeated Nikki Haley in New Hampshire — a state that the former South Carolina governor clearly needed to win.

But Haley is vowing to stay in the race, and the former president is openly seething about it all.

"Could somebody please explain to Nikki Haley that she lost — and lost really badly," Trump wrote on Truth Social early on Wednesday morning. "She also lost Iowa, BIG, last week."

At his election night party on Tuesday, Trump was even nastier.

"You must really hate her," Trump said to South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott, the former 2024 contender who backed the former president over Haley, who appointed him to the Senate seat he now holds.

"I just love you!" Scott replied.

By taking such a swipe at Haley in front of a fellow South Carolinian, especially one who has a long history with her, Trump is looking to severely undermine her before the state's February 24 primary.

It's a strategy he employed last weekend when he invited South Carolina Gov. Henry McMaster and other top GOP backers from the state to a New Hampshire rally — in an attempt to paint her as an unappealing candidate even by those who know her best. ( McMaster had already endorsed Trump before Haley formally entered the presidential race last year.)

Haley is going to pull out all the stops in order to perform well in her home state, but polling shows that she's still the underdog.

As of January 24, Trump maintains a wide lead in FiveThirtyEight's weighted polling average of the South Carolina GOP primary, with the former president currently averaging 62.2% support and Haley averaging 25% support.

While the former president wants the GOP race to end so he can turn his full attention to President Joe Biden, Haley believes she has the best chance at helping the party win back the White House — a powerful motivator for her.

Trump remains the miles-ahead favorite in the slew of Super Tuesday states on March 5, where he could all but lock up the nomination in terms of the delegate count. But Haley is convinced that she's the next-generation leader that the GOP needs to advance to the future, and she's determined to continue making her case to that effect.















current state of US political climate analysis
 factors that could lead to Trump winning 2024 election
 historical examples of US presidential comebacks
 US electoral system details
 impact of Trump's policies on voter decisions
 influence of former presidents on subsequent elections
 regional voting trends in US elections
 current approval ratings of Donald Trump
 economic indicators and their effect on US presidential elections
 social media's impact on political campaigns and elections
 key issues for voters in 2024 US election
 demographic shifts within US electorate since 2020
 role of primary elections in choosing party candidates
 strategies for winning electoral college
 influence of swing states in US presidential elections
 changes in party alignment and what they mean for elections
 Donald Trump's campaign strategy 2024
 Nikki Haley's political positions and her influence on the GOP
 FiveThirtyEight's analysis of 2024 election forecasting
 analysis Super Tuesday significance in primary elections
 delegate selection process in Republican primaries
 comparison of Trump's 2024 campaign to 2016 and 2020
 public perception of Trump and Haley's political conflict
 impact of endorsements from influential Republicans on primary outcomes
 potential running mates for Donald Trump in 2024
 media coverage's impact on public opinion in presidential elections
 examination of Donald Trump's political base and loyalty
 possibilities of a third-party candidate in the 2024 election
 implications of US foreign policy on 2024 presidential election
 analysis of political advertising and election fundraising in 2024 campaigns
 effect of voter turnout on election results
 cybersecurity and election integrity for 2024 election
 legal challenges and controversies surrounding the 2024 presidential election.















Donald Trump’s iron grip on the Republican Party has been clear since the day he announced he would make another run for the White House 14 months ago. It can be seen in the party’s ideological shift even further to the right on cultural issues and, especially, on immigration policy.

Iowa Republicans were a clear reflection of that on Monday night, delivering the former president an emphatic victory. They channeled his anger, and his view that basically everything President Joe Biden has done has been a “disaster.” About 9 in 10 voters said they want upheaval or substantial change in how the government operates, according to AP VoteCast, a survey of more than 1,500 voters who said they planned to take part in the caucuses.

As clear-cut as his win was, though, Iowa has not historically played the role of kingmaker in the Republican nominating process. New Hampshire’s voters don’t take their cues from Iowa.

Here are some key takeaways:

AN INCUMBENT CAMPAIGN

This was the least suspenseful Iowa caucus in modern memory because Trump has essentially been running as an incumbent president. He’s convinced many Republicans he didn’t really lose the 2020 election to Biden, repeatedly making false claims, and has dominated the race the way someone still in office does.

He traveled sparingly to the state, holding a modest number of rallies. He spurned candidate debates. He chose to appear at court hearings as a defendant in his legal cases in New York and Washington rather than speak to Iowa voters in the final days before the voting.

The former president, who remains the party’s dominant favorite, clearly wants to move on to the general election as quickly as possible. In his victory speech, he tried to portray the race as all but over, and a candidate known for his propensity for division asked his party and the nation to come together, praising rivals he had spent months denigrating. But Iowa winnows the field more than it determines the winner.

NO ‘FRAUD’?

After a “decisive” loss in Iowa 2016, Trump went on the attack. A pattern he repeated after losing to Joe Biden in the 2020 general election.

“Ted Cruz didn’t win Iowa, he illegally stole it. That is why all of the polls were so wrong any [sic] why he got more votes than anticipated. Bad!” Trump tweeted at the time. “Based on the fraud committed by Senator Ted Cruz during the Iowa Caucus, either a new election should take place or Cruz results nullified.”

Trump also told Boston Herald Radio that he’d likely sue: “I probably will; what he did is unthinkable.”

Trump has repeated his arguments the 2020 presidential election that he lost was “stolen” and that U.S. elections in general are “rigged.” There is no evidence that the 2020 election was stolen. Dozens of lawsuits were dismissed by courts and government and independent reviews have not found enough alleged fraud to throw the outcome into question.

On Monday, Trump accepted his win in the Iowa Caucuses, saying that “this is the third time we’ve won.”

TWISTS AND TURNS AHEAD

Inevitable can be a dangerous word, especially in New Hampshire, which holds its primary in eight days.

New Hampshire has famously delivered upsets in both parties. Former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley quipped that New Hampshire “corrects” Iowa. George W. Bush felt New Hampshire’s sting in 2000 when Senator John McCain defeated him. So did former vice president Walter Mondale when Senator Gary Hart of Colorado scored an upset in the Democratic race in 1984.

With its more moderate, educated electorate, New Hampshire presents Trump’s rivals with possibly their best opportunity to slow his march. Haley is hoping for a win there or at least a very strong showing, as is Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, who edged Haley out for second place in Iowa but trailed Trump by about 30 points.

After that comes a weird political lull — with the next major competitive race in South Carolina on Feb. 24.

But plenty can happen during that time. The U.S. Supreme Court on Feb. 8 is scheduled to hear arguments in a case challenging whether a constitutional clause banning those who “engaged in insurrection” from holding office applies to Trump. The high court may also weigh in on whether presidential immunity protects Trump from federal charges for trying to overturn his 2020 election loss.

The criminal trial, in that case, is scheduled to start on March 5 — Super Tuesday — when 14 states vote in the presidential nominating process. Trump’s strength among Republican voters is beyond dispute, but the road is long and could be bumpy.

IT’S NOT THE ECONOMY

Iowans had something on their minds, but it wasn’t jobs, taxes or business regulations.

About 4 in 10 caucus-goers said immigration was their top issue, compared to 1 in 3 picking the economy, according to VoteCast. Other priorities like foreign policy, energy and abortion ranked even lower.

Indeed, about two-thirds of caucusgoers said they felt their finances were holding steady or improving. But the voters still want major changes — 3 in 10 want a total upheaval of how the federal government runs while another 6 in 10 want substantial changes. Additionally, as Trump faces multiple criminal charges, 6 in 10 caucusgoers don’t have confidence in the U.S. legal system.

It adds up to a portrait of a slice of the electorate eager to challenge core democratic institutions in the U.S.

DESANTIS’ DISMAL RETURN ON INVESTMENT

Flush with more than $100 million in cash and fresh off a blowout reelection victory, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis entered the 2024 Republican presidential contest projecting himself as the heir to a MAGA political brand that a diminished Trump could no longer effectively carry.

Reality soon intruded.

Eight months and tens of millions of dollars later, DeSantis posed little threat to the former president in Iowa. Still, he vowed to continue his campaign and said he had “punched his ticket” out of Iowa with his second-place finish.

Despite more than $55 million in pro-DeSantis advertising spending, the Florida governor only narrowly bested Haley.

DeSantis has been dogged by negative stories about profligate spending, including DeSantis’ preference for flying private planes.

His next challenge will be whether donors will continue to support him.

THE EDUCATION DIVIDE

More than half of Haley’s voters had at least a college degree and roughly half of DeSantis’ did, according to VoteCast. But only about 2 in 10 of Trump’s did.

Education has been a major dividing line among white voters during the Trump era. Iowa confirms what polling has indicated during the primary — that the education divide is also splitting the GOP.

That hints at a possible weakness for Trump in November, should he be the nominee. A greater share of the voting public has at least a bachelor’s degree now than in 2016, and that share rises every year as degrees become more popular.

Another indication of vulnerability for Trump came in the suburbs, which tend to have the highest levels of education. Only about 4 in 10 caucusgoers there supported him. The suburbs were pivotal in Biden’s 2020 victory over Trump.

RAMASWAMY PUNCHED HIMSELF OUT

Abrasive, often grating and very online — Vivek Ramaswamy’s quixotic bid for the White House has come across as a millennial distillation of Trump’s Make America Great Again political movement.

Ramaswamy rapped along to verses of Eminem, delighted in trolling his rivals and often sought to out-Trump Trump with his brash rhetoric. That performative aspect helped the wealthy 38-year-old entrepreneur gain considerable attention in the early days of the Republican White House contest.

But it also proved to wear thin, perhaps summed up best when former New Jersey governor Chris Christie called him the “most obnoxious blowhard in America” during a debate.

As returns from Iowa’s caucus posted, Ramaswamy seemed unlikely to reach double digits, and he suspended his campaign.

OVER BEFORE IT STARTED?

In some ways, Iowa’s Republican caucuses were practically over before they even started, with Donald Trump cultivating a deep network of support over three presidential runs.

Seven in 10 Iowans who caucused for Trump on Monday night said they have known all along that they would support the man who has remade the Republican Party through his “Make America Great Again” political movement. Trump was carried to victory by the majority of caucusgoers who say they back it, a sign of his growing influence in a state that denied him a victory eight years ago.

His chief challengers — Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley and biotech entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy — tried to carve out their own coalitions. But none could match the demographic edges enjoyed by Trump in this year’s first presidential contest, according to the findings from AP VoteCast. Ramaswamy suspended his campaign after a disappointing finish in the caucuses.

Trump performed strongly in small town and rural communities, where about 6 in 10 caucusgoers said they live. He won with white evangelical Christians, who made up nearly half of the caucusgoers. He excelled among those without a college degree: 62% of caucusgoers in that group chose Trump.

If there is a reason for pause in his Iowa success, it is that many of the must-win states in the November general election are more urban, more suburban, more racially diverse and have slightly more college graduates as a percentage of their adult population than does Iowa.

AP VoteCast is a survey of more than 1,500 voters who said they planned to take part in the caucuses. The survey is conducted by The Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research.

HOW TRUMP WON IN IOWA

The 77-year-old Trump entered Iowa as the caucus favorite, and AP VoteCast showed why he has become a juggernaut among GOP voters in the state.

The demographics favored him, but so did the issues that people prioritized: immigration and the economy.

Among the roughly 4 in 10 Iowa caucusgoers who identified immigration as the most important issue for the nation, 59% backed Trump. Those participating in the caucuses agreed with his hard-line stance on finding ways to limit immigration.

About 9 in 10 backed building a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border, with about 7 in 10 expressing strong support for the idea first championed by Trump during his 2016 campaign. The vast majority, three-quarters, said immigrants do more to hurt than help the United States, an indication there is a desire to reduce overall immigration levels.

About one-third of caucusgoers prioritized the economy. Of those who selected it as their top issue, 53% supported Trump.

DESANTIS’ DISTANT SECOND

The key for DeSantis earning a second-place finish was the backing of conservatives, who favored him over Haley — even though they liked Trump most of all. About 7 in 10 Iowans who caucused defined themselves as conservatives. About two-thirds of the caucusgoers favored a ban on abortion after six weeks of pregnancy, and DeSantis performed slightly better than Haley among that group.

Haley finished narrowly behind DeSantis. She was the top candidate of the most anti-Trump Republicans in the state, including those who said the former president did something illegal in one of the pending criminal cases against him. She was also the top choice for Republican caucusgoers who voted for Biden in the 2020 election: two-thirds of them supported Haley. But she faced headwinds in a state that largely saw itself as loyal to Trump and his agenda.

DeSantis performed best among the caucusgoers dissatisfied with Trump but who said they would ultimately vote for him in the general election.

Most Iowa caucusgoers for either Haley or DeSantis said they would be dissatisfied with Trump as their party’s nominee. But unlike DeSantis’ backers, two-thirds of Haley’s caucusgoers say they would not ultimately vote for Trump in the general election.

POTENTIAL WEAKNESSES FOR TRUMP

Iowa also exposed some national vulnerabilities for Trump, who lost his 2020 reelection bid to Democrat Joe Biden.

The suburbs were a relative weakness for Trump. That’s a key challenge because AP VoteCast showed nearly half of voters in the 2020 general election said they lived in the suburbs. Only about one-third of Iowa Republicans in the suburbs supported him. Still, neither of his closest rivals bested Trump in the suburbs: about 3 in 10 Iowa caucusgoers in the suburbs also supported both Haley and DeSantis, respectively.

Nor did Trump have as much appeal with college graduates. About 2 in 10 of Trump’s Iowa backers held a college degree, compared with roughly half of those who backed DeSantis and slightly more than that for Haley.

And there are Trump’s legal troubles.

He was indicted multiple times in 2023 and faces the risk of one or more criminal convictions. But that appears so far to have done little damage to his standing with Republican voters.

Still, about one-quarter said Trump has done something illegal when it comes to at least one of the legal cases he is facing: his role in the Jan. 6, 2021, riot at the U.S. Capitol, his alleged attempts to interfere in the vote count in the 2020 presidential election or the discovery of classified documents at his Florida home that were supposed to be in government custody.

NO TO THE STATUS QUO

Caucusgoers wanted to give Republicans the green light to dramatically alter how the federal government operates. Some showed an exhaustion with what they perceived to be politics as usual and a distrust of government institutions.

Many envisioned something of a demolition project for how the country runs. About one-third said they are seeking a complete and total upheaval. An additional 56% of caucusgoers said they want substantial changes.

The vast majority of caucusgoers trusted Iowa elections, but about 4 in 10 were not too confident or not at all confident in the integrity of elections nationwide. Nearly 6 in 10 said they have little to no confidence in the American legal system.

AP VoteCast is a survey of the American electorate conducted by The Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research for AP and Fox News. The survey of 1,597 voters was conducted for eight days, concluding as the caucuses begin. Interviews were conducted in English and Spanish. The survey combines a random sample of registered voters drawn from state voter files and self-identified registered voters selected from nonprobability online panels. The margin of sampling error for voters is estimated to be plus or minus 3.4 percentage points. Find more details about AP VoteCast’s methodology at https://ap.org/votecast .

For the latest news, weather, sports, and streaming video, head to WHBF - OurQuadCities.com.
Anyone who has followed the fate of the TV business in recent years could not be blamed for thinking the medium is dying.

Consumers have been shifting away from traditional or linear TV viewing that is watched in real time to streaming video, where they can watch what they want on demand. In 2023, streaming surpassed broadcast and cable TV viewing for the first time, according to Nielsen.

But in the current presidential election cycle of 2024, the mantra is — long live TV.

Political advertising is a regular shot of adrenaline for the TV business every two years when House and Senate seats are in play. The dose is even more potent when the White House is on the line. Even as audiences decline, TV is expected to see a record haul in 2024 as a contentious presidential primary and general election — plus 435 congressional seats, 33 U.S. Senate races and 14 statewide gubernatorial contests — will drive political advertising expenditures across all platforms to $17 billion, according to media investment agency GroupM.

The figure is an increase of 31% over what was spent in the 2020 presidential election year and 24% over the previous high of $12.8 billion spent in 2022, according to GroupM's data.

"Local TV is going to see the vast majority of that," said Kate Scott-Dawkins, global president of business intelligence at GroupM. One TV executive estimated that local stations could see between $8 billion and $9 billion from political commercials.

It's why major station owners such as Nexstar, Fox Corporation, Scripps and Paramount Global are predicting a financial windfall, especially in markets located in the swing states up for grabs in the presidential campaign. California will be seeing spots early and often as Democrats vie for their party's nomination to run for the U.S. Senate seat formerly held by the late Dianne Feinstein.

Cable news networks, which devote the bulk of their coverage to politics, stand to see gains as well from national campaigns and issue advertising by advocacy groups and political action committees.

The polarized political climate is a factor in escalating spending. Referendums on abortion rights are expected to be on the ballot in several states. The last such vote, held in Ohio in November , led to $70 million in ad spending by groups representing both sides of the issue.

While most members of Congress are in safe districts and don't have to spend heavily on advertising, a growing number of incumbents on the extreme left or right are facing challenges where more moderate candidates are being put up against them.

"Historically you only saw significant primary money in an open seat," said Patrick Paolini, executive vice president for ad sales at Fox Television Stations. "Now we’re seeing it when the seat is filled with an incumbent who is actually going to still run. That’s part of the changing landscape in where this money is coming from."

While streaming is siphoning off viewers, local TV is still considered easier and more efficient to buy for a campaign that wants to spread a message quickly. While overall ratings have been in steady decline, broadcast TV still has high-rated live sports events such as the NFL, where every game is shown on local TV in the markets of the teams, playing even in match-ups that are shown nationally on streaming or cable.

"Regardless of any kind of audience decline, TV is still the best way to reach the masses in a short amount of time," said Robert Breen, co-head of operations and sales for CBS Television Stations.

Television stations also may be benefiting from political consulting firms and campaigns being slow to adapt to streaming.

"There is a certain amount of 'This is what we’ve done in the past, we know it works and we’re going to do it again,'" said Scott-Dawkins.

Streaming services such as Netflix, Hulu, Disney+ and Amazon — which all now have ad-supported tiers — are expected to get a greater share of political dollars in this campaign cycle, according to GroupM. Ondine Fortune, a veteran political ad buyer based in Redondo Beach, noted that the spending is still not commensurate with the number of viewers that streaming delivers.

"When I get a new client, I have to put them through a whole learning process," Fortune said. "They are not putting in the dollars they should be on streaming. They don’t believe in it. It’s like how cable was in the early days."

Fortune believes more political ad money will shift to streaming as a younger generation of political operatives comes online.

But for now, traditional TV will continue to benefit from one of its key advantages — local newscasts, which will be saturated with political ads in markets with competitive races.

Campaigns favor running their spots in local newscasts because they are watched by viewers who are politically engaged and more likely to go out and vote. They tend to be older and more likely to watch traditional TV than younger consumers.

The local news environment appeals to campaigns as well. Surveys by the Knight Foundation have found that Americans trust local news more than national news sources by a 2-to-1 margin, with TV stations being their primary news source.

As viewers have gone to streaming for scripted dramas, sitcoms and movies, TV stations have added more live local newscasts to their lineups.

A survey by the Radio Television Digital News Assn. and Newhouse School at Syracuse University found that TV stations were airing 6.6 hours of news each weekday in 2022, up from 5.7 hours in 2022.

Unlike network and syndicated programming, stations get all of the commercials and ad revenue in those hours. Fox's station group churns out a combined 1,200 hours of local news a week.

While the generally nonpartisan approach of local TV news is a selling point to campaigns, some also want to reach the tribal political junkies who watch cable news as well. Campaigns for president, U.S. Senate and governor will make national buys on cable news to raise their profile and stimulate campaign contributions.

Even though much of the programming on conservative-leaning Fox News is not hospitable to liberal viewpoints, the most-watched cable network has a large number of Democrats and independents tuning in, and campaigns want to reach them. In 2020, President Biden's campaign made a multimillion-dollar commercial buy on Fox News, including during the network's coverage of the Republican National Convention.

"Candidates have taken notice of that," said Jeff Collins, executive vice president of ad sales for Fox News. "We've seen them come out and want to be in high-rated programming to get their message in front of an engaged audience that cares about politics."

Collins added that his network is open for business to all parties and points of view, with few restrictions on where their spots run.

One of the commercials that ran during last week's Fox News town hall with former President Trump — watched by 4.5 million viewers — was purchased by Republican Accountability, a political action committee opposed to Trump.

The ad used footage showing the violence at the Jan. 6 insurrection with the message "He can never be president again."

This story originally appeared in Los Angeles Times .
For Democrats who focus on the Latino vote, the numbers are etched in their minds.

In 2012, Barack Obama reached a sky-high level of 71% Hispanic support, while Hillary Clinton received 66% in her losing campaign.

But as President Biden's re-election campaign kicks into high gear, one under reported characteristic of the Latino electorate could play a critical role in whether Biden is able to able to keep or exceed the lower, but still crucial, 59% Latino support he earned while winning the presidency in 2020.

According to a robust UnidosUS poll of 3,037 Hispanic eligible voters from the end of the year, 22% of Latinos will be voting in their first presidential election in 2024, with a surprising 38% of the Latino electorate — nearly 4 in 10 voters — being new since Clinton and Donald Trump faced off in 2016.

The politically important Latino vote is often described as not being monolithic and also very young compared to other groups. But these findings also show that the Hispanic electorate is not static and evolving every cycle.

In 2024, according to Pew Hispanic's Mark Hugo Lopez, the major growth of new Latino voters since 2020 is coming from U.S.-born Hispanics who are turning 18. That means of the 4 million new Latino voters — which includes U.S. born, those who are naturalizing, and a small number who are coming from Puerto Rico and can vote as U.S. citizens — about 3 million are U.S.-born Latinos coming of age and eligible to vote.

The Democratic Party - already cognizant that its support from Hispanics has eroded over the last decade, particularly with Latino men, now faces the daunting prospect of needing to defeat Trump again with a Biden campaign that is tasked with mobilizing a Latino electorate that increasingly does not have the same affinity for the Democratic Party as it did in past cycles.

"People talk about the problem he has with the youth vote, the f***ing youth vote is the Latino vote," said Mike Madrid, a longtime Republican operative who broke with the party after the rise of Trump and is the author of "The Latino Century: How America’s Largest Minority is Shaping Our Democracy," out in June.

Madrid refers to Pew Hispanic numbers showing that Latinos comprise 21% of the nearly 50 million eligible voters under 30 and nearly one in four voters 18 to 24-years-old.

While he believes the fundamentals of the race are as strong in favoring an incumbent re-election as they have been since 1996, despite the panic among Democrats, Madrid said the height of the immigration wave from the mid-1990s to 2007 have led to a boom of U.S.-born young Latinos entering the electorate who care less about immigration and won't be reached through Spanish-language ads on Univision and Telemundo.

"We know the quantifiable problem Biden has with U.S.-born Hispanics and with young voters and that problem still persists," he said.

A Univision poll this fall that otherwise showed Biden outperforming Trump with Latinos over the 2020 result, revealed that while Biden doubled Trump's support with Spanish-dominant Hispanics, he led only 46% to 43% among English-speaking Latinos.

Still, the Biden campaign has made engaging young Hispanics an integral part of their overall Latino strategy, treating the group like persuadable voters, not just get out-the-vote targets. It began investing earlier and more consistently, it told The Messenger, to drive a connection between popular issues and Biden with the understanding that it will ultimately take time to drive up support.

"Young Latinos are key to our reelection, which is why we're investing earlier than ever to mobilize them around an agenda that is fighting for their future," said campaign spokesperson Kevin Munoz. "It's still early in the cycle, but we are laying strong foundations in place to energize and activate young Latinos around the issues they care most about, while highlighting the real threat Donald Trump and MAGA Republicans pose to their freedoms, our democracy, and their economic well-being."

Like its previous Democratic presidential campaign counterparts, the Biden campaign fields well-meaning private calls from Democrats with suggestions on how to reach Latinos better, which it prefers over public criticism. But at least one Democratic operative has grown frustrated, after privately bringing her concerns to the Biden administration on their problem with Hispanic voters, to no avail.

“I don’t think they know how to reach these younger voters. A lot of the people making decisions do not have an understanding of cultural sensitivities with Latin American diasporas in the United States,” Evelyn Pérez Verdia, a Democratic strategist for over two decades in Florida, told The Messenger. “We can’t continue to talk to Hispanics like it’s one group and we all think the same — not just country of origin but also subculture depending on if you were born in the U.S.”

The TikTok Election

When the Biden campaign outlined its " football y futbol " strategy featuring a Spanglish ad on streaming platforms alongside NFL and Liga MX soccer programming this fall, it was obvious that the campaign was attempting to address shortcomings with Latino men. But consultant Adrian Saenz made clear the outreach was aimed at young Latinos as well.

The campaign has since last year been interested not just in the policy issues young Hispanic voters care about, but also what it calls the right "media mix" to reach them, poring over the latest Nielsen and Pew reports to understand what streaming platforms and social media apps young Latinos are using.

"The Latino electorate is growing and replenishing at such a rate - which makes it different than any other group in the country with the most first-time and second-time voters," said pollster Matt Barreto who is working with the Biden campaign again in 2024. "It's important to remember when you’re looking at data, they look up for grabs, but they just have less experience voting so they need more outreach."

The campaign has more planned outreach aimed at young voters and young Latinos in the coming months, which it believes will also help solidify key states like Arizona, which Biden won by 11,000 votes in 2020, North Carolina, which has the most first-time Latino voters of any state, and Georgia, which Biden won by less than 12,000 votes.

Latinos over the age of 60 are six-to-one Democrat, Barreto said - not as strong as older Black voters, but they remember civil rights marches and the infamous Prop 187 in California, which created a Latino civil rights moment in California.

It adds up to more "crystallized partisanship" than their younger counterparts, which he said is normal.

"I challenge anyone to find me data that young Latinos are warming to Donald Trump," he said, adding that they're "very upset about January 6, very upset about abortion, climate change, and gun violence. Those are issues where the contrast comes in."

Kristian Ramos, a Democratic consultant and Latino vote expert, told The Messenger it's easy to forget young people have engaged in record turnout since 2016, noting that a CIRCLE analysis from Tufts University found half of young voters voted in 2020, an 11-point increase over 2016.

"There's no question right now there is some wandering of the coalition of younger folks and there is some frustration but that does not translate to support for Donald Trump," he said. "I don't think there has ever been a more unpopular presidential candidate for young people. He got rid of Roe v. Wade, he is antagonistic to climate change, and believes American politics should go back to the 1950’s.

Still, recent polling has shown Trump at times leading among young voters, with Biden dragged down by third-party candidates and the war between Israel and Hamas.

Giancarlo Sopo, a Republican operative who led Trump's Hispanic advertising in 2020, said polling data highlights a crucial trend.

"Hispanics under 30 trend more liberal and are notably less inclined to identify as Republican; however, they also exhibit a higher degree of political apathy," he said. "This presents significant challenges and opportunities for both parties. For Democrats, the task is to galvanize voters who are ideologically sympathetic, but characteristically less motivated to vote. For the GOP, there's ample room for growth, but many of these voters live in expensive media markets. The party that effectively engages and mobilizes this demographic will have a distinct advantage."

Imer Cespedes-Alvarado, 20, a UNLV student in Las Vegas, and founder of Youth Voice of Nevada, said his group is nonpartisan but most of the time finds themselves aligned with Democrats — but just not on the war that has left 1200 Israelis dead after the October 7 terrorist attack and more than 22,000 Palestinians killed, the majority women and children.

"Right now we've been having conversations with the youth here in Nevada who believe Biden is less worse than Trump," he said of the prospect of voting. "But at the same time with the war going on and situations across the world, people want to stay home."

Santiago Mayer, 22, moved to the U.S. in 2017 from Mexico when two things triggered his interest in political advocacy: Trump calling Mexican immigrants rapists and murderers, he says, and the Muslim ban, instituted by Trump in the early days of his presidency, which is how he learned how disconnected young people were from politics because they didn’t know it was happening. It led to him starting Voters of Tomorrow.

He said how young people feel about the war in Gaza is complicated.

"Young people are very empathetic, they want Israelis and Palestinians to be safe, we want everyone to be safe," he said. "Young people, Gen Z want peace and love across the world, it sounds corny, but it’s true."

He said he is much less concerned with what is happening now than what happens over the next few months with a possible end to the war in sight.

"If people are mad, how are we winning them back?" he asked. "The answer is not to scold or scream at them on Twitter. If we want young people to vote, show them a vision for what comes next. Not just on this issue, but across the board, from abortion rights, to banning assault rifles, student debt and climate. Tell them what Joe Biden is for while Trump is screaming about taking backwards, authoritarian steps."

For its part, the Biden campaign, which sees young Latinos as persuadable voters, agrees.

"The goal is the same," Saenz said. "You gotta move 'em from where you are today, to being for the president, to getting you out to vote."

But beyond YouTube, Hulu, ESPN Deportes, and other streaming TV platforms with English and Spanglish messages, the campaign eyes the social media juggernaut TikTok as a key part of the media mix for young Latinos, given that it is the fastest growing platform where people get their news.

Consider this: In 2020, just 3% of U.S adults got their news from TikTok, but now that number is one-third for 18 to 29-year-olds, according to a Pew Research Center report from November.

The campaign envisions a combination of celebrities, young influencers, and even "micro-influencers" who may have influence in a single policy area as worthwhile partners to provide more organic feeling content.

"Getting to the right micro-influencer in Las Vegas or Tucson or Charlotte needs to be part of our strategy, which is still developing, but this is the goal," Saenz said.

"This is going to be the first major TikTok election," said Chuck Rocha, a former senior advisor to Bernie Sanders presidential campaign in 2020, who was the architect of his robust Latino vote program. "Any politician talking about not using TikTok is ignoring not only the youth vote, but increasingly the Latino youth vote, because that’s where they are consuming almost all of their communications.”

Harris Can Communicate to Young People that They're Being Listened To

Genesis Barron, 20, is the daughter of a Culinary Union member in Las Vegas, the powerful labor union that has influenced elections in Nevada for years, boosting Democrats statewide and nationally. She's a reminder that while many young people care about a host of progressive issues, they, like so many other Americans, see the state of the economy as both critical, and intensely personal.

"Employment rates are up, while less people are getting fired, and more people are being hired. Gas prices are down, while groceries are still a little bit rough, but they're slightly better," she said, before turning to how her friends are disconnected from many of the Washington policy fights and campaigns.

"They do care about politics and the state of where this country is going but my friends and the people around me are not really focused on politics too much right now," she said.

Barron was speaking after a fiery speech by Vice President Kamala Harris to the Culinary Union earlier this month, a validator at the top of the ticket the campaign is counting on to make the case to young Latino voters and other young voters of color across the country this year. The vice president in 2023 held events and spoke to media often aimed at Black and Latino constituencies, with a college tour that hit nine stops including historically black colleges and universities as well as Hispanic-serving institutions.

The administration previously told The Messenger this cross section of engagement with Black and Latino communities is intentional, including Telemundo and Univision interviews last year as well.

While Harris started the New Year in Las Vegas, with Nevada rising to the top of critical battleground states this year, a source close to the campaign told The Messenger more such trips to engage "with Latinos and young Latinos in Nevada and across the country" are planned soon.

It's a plan allies strongly support.

"When she was doing the college tour we had phenomenal turnout for her events, it's not just young people who love her, but particularly young Latinos and people of color," Mayer said. "If she brings that same energy, she's not just a phenomenal surrogate, but it communicates to young people that they are being listened to on the campaign."

The campaign is betting that it can build back its support among Hispanic men and young Latinos better than it was in 2020 to stop the drop in Democratic support from Hispanics since 2012 with this consistent level of outreach.

But one reason campaign sources and sources close to the re-elect believe Biden is well-positioned is because they say campaign manager Julie Chavez Rodriguez is empowered to prioritize Latino outreach.

They tell the previously unreported story of how she helped get a critical $1 million into Arizona during the final weeks of the campaign in October of 2020 to reach Latinos because the early Latino vote was lagging. The meeting included Chavez Rodriguez, Saenz, Barreto, and Jorge Neri, who brought similar calls for Latino mobilization needs from his meetings with local Democrats on the ground in Nevada. Chavez Rodriguez asked what they believed was needed and Saenz said he wanted to send extra mail to Latinos because the final poll of Latinos in Arizona was fine, but not extraordinary. As the campaign looked at the early vote in Latino heavy zip codes, it felt they were not getting as many ballots back yet as they needed.

After that meeting Chavez Rodriguez relayed the message to Jen O'Malley Dillon, the campaign manager at the time, which led to Arizona getting $1 million late for Latinos, and Nevada also getting endgame resources for Hispanic voter mobilization.

It's the kind of senior decision-making ability that could play a key role again in 2024, with the Brookings Institute writing last spring that Nevada and Arizona — states where young Latinos make up 40% of all newly eligible voters — were identified as swing states "where Latino youth participation in the 2020 election was decisive."

"Towards the end of the campaign there was a team of us working to make sure we did everything we could to turnout Latinos and we knew Arizona and Nevada and other areas were very important to us," said Jorge Neri, who is not currently with the campaign. "But for us having an advocate like Julie at headquarters understanding the bigger picture of why this investment was so important, when you see the margins, you can see how this investment had a direct impact on Biden's ability to win Arizona and Nevada."
The 2024 presidential election could be a rematch of the 2020 presidential election. In that presidential race, Joe Biden defeated Donald Trump to take the White House.

National polls of registered voters continue to show a close hypothetical race for the 2024 election between the two potential candidates.

What Happened: President Biden and former President Trump have been the frontrunners for the Democratic and Republican parties, respectively, ahead of the 2024 election for many months.

Trump won the Iowa caucus Monday night to jump out in the early lead for the nod for the GOP nomination in the 2024 presidential election.

Trending: Pakistan Warns Iran Of 'Serious Consequences' After Accusing Tehran Of Violating Airspace And Killing 2 C

Must Read: New York Knicks Owner Faces Lawsuit, Could Legal Troubles Lead To Sale Of NBA Team? Madison Square Garden Sports Could Excite Sports Fans, Investors

Trump won the state of Iowa with 51% of the vote, earning 20 delegates in the Republican primary race. Ron DeSantis ranked second with 21.2% of the vote, earning nine delegates. Nikki Haley ranked third with 19.1% of the vote and eight delegates.

Along with winning the Iowa caucus, Trump continues to lead in most national polls of Republican voters. The most recent Morning Consult poll showed Trump with a record 57-point lead and a record 69% support.

While Trump held a lead of 50 points or more over his Republican opposition in several consecutive weeks, the former president has been neck and neck in a hypothetical matchup against Biden.

The weekly Morning Consult poll asked registered voters who they would select in a hypothetical matchup of Trump vs. Biden.

In this week's poll, Trump received 43% of the vote and Biden received 41% of the vote. Eleven percent selected Someone Else and 5% selected Don't Know.

This marked a gain of one percentage point for Trump from the previous week and a decline of two percentage points for Biden from the previous week. The poll resulted in a three-point swing for Trump to retake the lead.

The important Independent voters, who could decide the election, selected their 2024 pick as the following, with last week's results in parentheses:

Joe Biden: 31% (31%)

Donald Trump: 37% (38%)

Someone Else: 22% (21%)

Don't Know: 10% (10%)

Trump lost one percentage point among the Independent voters, while Biden's support remained the same.

The poll found that 87% of Republicans selected Trump for the hypothetical 2024 poll, which was up one percentage point from last week's results. The poll also found that 85% of voters who voted for Trump in the 2020 election are backing him again, which was down two percentage points from last week's results.

In the latest poll, 82% of Democratic voters selected Biden, which was down two percentage points from last week's poll. The poll also found that 81% of voters who backed Biden in the 2020 election are backing him again in the poll, which is in line with the previous week.

Related Link: 2024 Win For President Joe Biden Or Donald Trump Would Be ‘Threatening’ For Markets, Ray Dalio Says

Why It's Important: After retaking a lead in last week's poll for the first time in weeks, Biden falls behind Trump in the poll of nationally registered voters.

Over the past 16 weeks, Biden was tied with Trump five times, ahead of the former president four times and ranked behind the former president seven times.

Before the past four months, Biden posted a lead of one to two percentage points in almost all polls dating back to when polling began in December.

A big concern that remains for Biden could be what was listed as the top issue for voters ahead of the 2024 election in the Morning Consult poll. Voters selected the economy as the top concern, ranking ahead of national security and healthcare.

The economy being a major concern could be worrisome to Biden's campaign and the Democrats with consumers feeling the effects of higher inflation leading to higher prices for goods and services. Some have blamed Biden for not doing enough to help consumers who are struggling with higher prices and living expenses.

Biden recently highlighted the all-time highs for the stock market in a campaign video, which drew the attention of voters and Trump. While stock market indexes are at all-time highs, it comes with high inflation and after 2022, saw a large market drop.

The S&P 500 gained 37.4% during Biden's first year in office, which was the best one-year market return under a president since President Harry Truman in 1945.

In 2022, the S&P 500 experienced a decline of over 19%, representing the largest annual drop since 2008.

Benzinga recently shared the SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (NYSE:SPY), which tracks the S&P 500 Index, is up 23.7% since Biden assumed the presidency. The return over the last nearly two years would represent an average yearly gain of around 11.9%.

During Trump's four years as president, the S&P 500 had average annual gains of 14.5%. The SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust was up a total of around 67% during the four years under Trump, making it one of the best four-year returns for the S&P 500 in recent history.

Although Biden can point to higher stock market prices and record peaks during his tenure, the stock market's overall performance and annual average returns under Trump still surpassed those during Biden's time in office.

As the 2024 presidential election approaches, the economy and stock market returns are likely to become key topics of discussion. If the economy remains the key issue for voters for the 2024 election, the past results may tip the scales in Trump's favor.

Read Next: Why Buy Stocks In A Presidential Election Year? History Has A Crazy Stat For You

Photo: Shutterstock

© 2024 Benzinga.com. Benzinga does not provide investment advice. All rights reserved.

This article Trump Vs. Biden: Former President Retakes Lead In 2024 Election Poll, But Sees Lower Support From Independent Voters originally appeared on Benzinga.com .




Joe Biden and the DNC have arranged a coronation, but what they don’t want you to know is that changing the rules is at least as important as choosing our rulers.

This year progressive activists are gearing up to elect “rulers” who can defeat right-wing politicians from the presidency on down the ballot. But if our aim is economic and social justice, we’d do better to focus on changing the rules—including the rules of the Democratic Party. Because even more important than the candidates we elect are the rules that determine whether real change is possible.

The United States is near the bottom compared to other global democracies in terms of voting rights, guards against the influence of money in politics, majority governance, and more . The candidates we elect pay scant attention to the minimal outcomes we achieve, largely because of the rules, which encourage them to focus instead on messaging. Senate rules, the Electoral College, the federal judiciary, voter registration hurdles, gerrymandering, legal and judicial limits on organizing and collective bargaining, Citizens United —all combine to discourage popular participation and activism. This means that the candidates who win under the current rules—our rulers—have little accountability to political organizations beyond their next election.

Democratic Party rules also play a major role in blocking progressive change, both at the national level and in the state parties. There are no limits on dark money in primaries; many state parties lack transparency in their governing structure; and same-day party registration for primary voting has never been enforced in many states, despite adoption by the DNC in 2018. (States like New York continue to make it difficult for millions of unaffiliated voters to participate in the primary, since they require party registration a month earlier by voters who are not already party-affiliated. Most are young—and in many states the default at registration is unaffiliated—but then party leaders in many states don’t actually want them voting in primaries, since they are more likely to vote against incumbents.)

Much more support is needed for the growing number of party members at all levels working to reform state parties, as well as the 50 or 60 Democratic National Committee (DNC) members, including many state chairs, still pushing for reform at the national level. Last year, despite a resolution submitted by about 10 percent of DNC members, the party leadership blocked any discussion of the record level of dark-money contributions that changed the outcomes of Democratic primaries, particularly for Congress. Sam Bankman-Fried alone illegally spent millions influencing who got to run for office as a Democrat—and he was just one of many big dark-money spenders, including other crypto tycoons, AIPAC, and a wide range of right-wingers and even liberal organizations.

Dark-money spending will likely be even greater this year, particularly in the majority of “Democratic” districts where there is a progressive incumbent and no meaningful Republican challenger. The primary provides a means for wealthy conservatives to block candidates who support issues such as imposing price caps on pharma, expanding Medicare, cutting the bloated military budget, opposing arming the right-wing Israeli government. Most Democratic political operatives and their media and legal consultants will continue to ignore the influence of dark money in primaries while they scoop it up.

More than a year ago, the DNC adopted new rules—including a primary calendar that ignored state law in Iowa and New Hampshire and eliminated any primary debates—designed to ensure that Biden’s coronation would proceed untroubled by opposition from any credible Democrat. Progressives should accept that at this point the rules now preclude any new candidates from entering presidential primaries; even if Biden were to drop out, he and his campaign advisors would still control the selection of a replacement. But for those of us who believe the Democratic Party is still the only viable channel for progressive change, the 2024 Democratic National Convention remains crucially important.

In both 2016 and 2020, led by Senator Bernie Sanders and his army of delegates, the convention adopted resolutions supporting a series of reforms, including practically eliminating the role of 750 or more superdelegates in the nominating process. Secretary Clinton agreed, after negotiating with Sanders, as did the Biden campaign in 2020—and in both cases Unity resolutions were adopted that remain in force through 2024 . But unless the 2024 convention adopts a similar resolution, the DNC starts from scratch for 2028 and all the reforms gained by the Sanders forces—particularly those keeping superdelegates out of the nominating process—will expire, leaving the field to DNC insiders again.

Our Revolution and other organizations will be encouraging members to run in their states for convention delegate, pledged to Biden (party rules again ensure that nearly all elected delegates will be pledged to Biden) but supporting party reform and a progressive platform. Each state has its own delegate selection plan , easily searchable with deadlines varying over the next several months. Progressive House and Senate members, and many state party chairs will again be supporting this effort, and pressuring the Biden campaign for support including on such progressive platform items from 2020 as reducing prices on a wider range of prescription drugs, eliminating carbon from power plants, and a path to citizenship for most immigrants. Unity cannot simply be based on defeating Trump—as vital as that may be—but also on the recognition that progressives continue to be vital to party success in 2024.

Each state party has its own process, but it often begins with presidential delegate selection, with those same delegates comprising at least part of the state party decision making structure. In states where reformers from the Sanders campaigns, and others, have engaged and contended for leadership—including Washington, Oregon, Arizona, as well as smaller states like Nebraska, Alaska, and Wyoming—significant change has occurred. But New York, New Jersey, and other Eastern and Southern states are at the other extreme. For example, in New York in 2021, when democratic socialist India Walton defeated Buffalo’s incumbent mayor in the party primary, the state party chair led a write-in campaign to defeat her—in direct violation of national party rules. But there was no sustained effort to remove him by the center-left groups that had supported Walton.

If our focus is progressive change at the federal level, Biden’s reelection, a Democratic House majority, more Progressive Caucus members, and a Senate Democratic majority are all important goals. The Senate Democratic caucus is finally prepared to actively consider changes to the filibuster that would result in debate and final passage by a simple majority—not the current 60-vote supermajority—on issues starting with voting rights and other democracy measures, but also including workers’ rights, pharma pricing, and other key parts of the progressive agenda. Again, this is party change at the Senate caucus level that until now has been impossible.

Change at the party level is essential given the constraints of the rules that currently bind us. It makes no sense to engage in primaries at the municipal, state, and federal levels and ignore the party processes that set the rules for those contests. Beyond the party, we need to focus on changing the wide range of rules that keep progressive governance perpetually out of reach. If we stay focused on governance—and those structural changes are linked to issue campaigns that will galvanize popular support—we have a much better chance for our politics to move beyond protest towards the power to genuinely change people’s lives.
Get the latest news on the 2024 presidential election from our reporters in Washington and on the campaign trail.

6:41 PM: Analysis from Hannah Knowles, National politics reporter covering campaigns

Iowans have been bombarded with mail for months about the nomination contest. One Republican voter here says he’s received 124 pieces of mail about the presidential candidates since the August debate (he keeps a detailed tally). While most of them are from the candidates or their super PACs, he also counted more than a dozen from Americans for Prosperity, an arm of the Koch network that opposes former president Donald Trump and recently threw its weight behind Nikki Haley.

5:57 PM: Supreme Court says it will decide whether Trump qualifies for Colorado ballot

The U.S. Supreme Court said Friday that it will decide whether former president Donald Trump’s name can appear on primary election ballots, a case that ensures the justices will play a central role in shaping this year’s presidential election.

The decision to review the case from Colorado at oral argument in early February comes after that state’s top court disqualified the Republican front-runner, finding Trump engaged in an insurrection before and during the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol.

Friday’s announcement puts the justices in a pivotal, potentially uncomfortable position with echoes of the court’s involvement in the 2000 election. Its decision then assured victory for President George W. Bush, polarized the nation and damaged the court’s reputation as an independent institution.

The court’s brief order scheduled oral argument for Feb. 8, and came the day before the third anniversary of the Capitol riot.

Legal scholars and state election officials have urged the court to quickly settle the question of Trump’s eligibility as a candidate and to ensure all states follow the same policy ahead of this year’s primary voting. Trump holds a wide lead over other Republican contenders, with the Iowa caucuses less than two weeks away and state primaries starting Jan. 23.

The Colorado decision was the first time a court found a presidential candidate could be barred from the ballot because of a provision of the post-Civil War 14th Amendment. The provision prevents insurrectionists from holding office and was designed to keep Confederates from returning to power.

Read the full story

By: Ann E. Marimow

5:48 PM: Biden’s first campaign speech jabs at Trump threat to democracy

In a speech kicking off his election-year campaigning, President Biden made preserving democracy in America the centerpiece of his appeal.

The speech was squarely focused on the person Biden says may be the biggest threat to the country’s democratic values: former president Donald Trump. In uncharacteristically vivid and sharp attacks, Biden mentioned Trump by name more than 40 times in less than an hour.

Trump is the front-runner for the Republican nomination, with a large polling and fundraising edge over his challengers: Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, former ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley, former New Jersey governor Chris Christie and biotech entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy. Biden described Trump as the instigator of the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol, a phony patriot, and a threat to freedom and democracy here and abroad.

“Donald Trump’s campaign is about him, not America, not you,” Biden said in a speech delivered on the eve of the third anniversary of the Jan. 6 attack. “Donald Trump’s campaign is obsessed with the past, not the future. He’s willing to sacrifice our democracy, put himself in power.”

In describing the attack on the Capitol, Biden noted that police officers died that day “because of Donald Trump’s lies.” The president added: “He promised it would be wild. And it was. He told the crowd to fight like hell, and all hell was unleashed.”

Biden also sought to characterize Trump as a loser. He reiterated that even Republican officials could find no evidence to back up Trump’s claims of voter fraud and a stolen election in 2020.

“Trump lost the popular vote by 7 million,” Biden said. “Trump’s claims about the 2020 election never could stand up in court. Trump lost 60 court cases, 60. Trump lost in Republican-controlled states. Trump lost before a Trump-appointed judge” and “before the United States Supreme Court. All of them, he lost. Trump lost.”

“Recount after recount after recount in state after state,” Biden continued. “But in desperation and weakness, Trump and his MAGA followers went after election officials, ones who ensured your powers as citizens would be heard.”

Biden also attacked Trump over two of his most closely held beliefs: that he is a patriot and a winner. The president said Trump “doesn’t understand the basic truth” that “you can’t love your country only when you win.”

Biden also reminded people of Trump’s more recent controversies. “He talks about the blood of Americans being poisoned, echoing the same exact language used in Nazi Germany,” Biden said.

Toward the end of his speech, Biden cast the upcoming election as a life-or-death scenario for freedom and democracy.

“This is the first national election since [the] January 6th insurrection placed a dagger at the throat of American democracy,” Biden said, adding: “We all know who Donald Trump is. The question we have to answer is ‘Who are we?’”

By: Azi Paybarah

5:36 PM: In email, Biden says ‘our leaders don’t hold on to power relentlessly’

President Biden’s campaign sent an email to supporters after his speech in Pennsylvania on Friday, harking back to how George Washington left office at the height of his popularity after defeating the British army and helping America gain its independence more than 200 years ago.

Washington, Biden said, “could have held on to that power as long as he wanted.”

“But that wasn’t the America he and the American troops of Valley Forge had fought for,” he added. “In America, our leaders don’t hold on to power relentlessly. Our leaders return power to the people — willingly.”

By: Azi Paybarah

5:01 PM: New Mexico attorney general won’t charge Republicans’ 2020 electors

New Mexico Attorney General Raúl Torrez announced Friday that he was not charging five Republicans who met as presidential electors in 2020 after Donald Trump lost the state.

Republicans in seven states that Joe Biden won met as electors in December 2020, and prosecutors have charged some of them in Georgia, Michigan and Nevada. In five of the states, the Republicans signed official-looking paperwork claiming to be legitimate electors, but in New Mexico and Pennsylvania the documents included caveats that said the electoral votes should be counted only if a court found that the Republicans were the state’s true electors.

In a news release, Torrez’s office said the New Mexico Republicans were not subject to prosecution under state law. He recommended changing the law to prevent similar actions in the future.

“It is disgraceful that New Mexicans were enlisted in a plot to undermine democracy and thwart the peaceful and orderly transfer of power,” Torrez said in a written statement.

The seven states that Biden won where Republican electors met are Arizona, Georgia, Michigan, Nevada, New Mexico, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Investigations into post-election activities are ongoing in Arizona and Wisconsin.

By: Patrick Marley

4:05 PM: Analysis from Hannah Knowles, National politics reporter covering campaigns

It’s been interesting to see each candidate’s choice of surrogates in the final stretch here in Iowa.

Far-right Rep. Marjorie Taylor-Greene (Ga.) just held an event promoting Donald Trump. Nikki Haley brought in the governor of another key early state, Chris Sununu of New Hampshire. Ron DeSantis was on the trail today with Reps. Chip Roy (Tex.) and Thomas Massie (Ky.), two of his earliest endorsers. Meanwhile, his wife, Casey DeSantis, has been holding solo events, and Iowa Gov. Kim Reynolds is also promoting the Florida governor.

3:51 PM: Analysis from Azi Paybarah, National reporter covering campaigns and breaking politics news.

President Biden advertised a speech about preserving Democracy. But it’s squarely focused on the person he considers its greatest threat, former president Donald Trump, whom he called “a loser.”

“Trump exhausted every legal avenue available to him to overturn the election,” Biden said of the aftermath of the 2020 presidential election. And that led “Trump back to the truth, that I’d won the election and he was a loser.”

Later, Biden said, “In trying to rewrite the facts of January 6th, Trump is trying to steal history the same way he tried to steal the election. But we knew the truth because we saw it with our own eyes.”

3:15 PM: Analysis from Azi Paybarah, National reporter covering campaigns and breaking politics news.

Two Republican organizations have filed amicus briefs with the Supreme Court in an attempt to keep Donald Trump on the ballot in states where officials want to remove him.

In a statement, Republican National Committee Chairwoman Ronna McDaniel said removing Trump is “an attack on our electoral system.” National Republican Congressional Committee Chairman Richard Hudson (R-N.C.) characterized efforts in Colorado and Maine as “election interference thinly veiled as a legal decision.”

2:59 PM: Analysis from Amy B Wang, National politics reporter

AJ Spiker, the former chairman of the Iowa Republican Party, is endorsing Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis (R) for president. In a letter to supporters, Spiker — who has been critical of Donald Trump — called the Jan. 15 Iowa caucuses “a battle for the soul of the Republican Party and our nation.”

Spiker also warned of a possible open national convention, “especially with potential candidates faltering under legal and ethical scrutiny,” a reference to Trump’s indictments on 91 criminal charges in four separate cases.

2:43 PM: In speech marking Jan. 6 anniversary, Biden looks back to history

President Biden is slated to deliver remarks on Friday, the eve of the anniversary of the Jan. 6, 2021 , insurrection, that aim to center the upcoming presidential election on a fight for democracy. New excerpts of his speech show Biden will reference American history to set a vision for the country’s future.

Biden will speak near Valley Forge, Pa. — where a group of militias gathered to form a coalition to fight for democracy in the 1770s, and where George Washington established headquarters during the Revolutionary War.

In excerpts, Biden notes that the insurrectionists at the Capitol in 2021 “stormed right past” a portrait of Washington.

“The artist who painted the portrait memorialized this moment because he said it was ‘one of the highest moral lessons ever given to the world,’” Biden is expected to say. “George Washington was at the height of his power … He could have held onto that power as long as he wanted. But that wasn’t the America he and the American troops of Valley Forge had fought for.”

The broader lesson, Biden will say, is that in America, “our leaders don’t hold on to power relentlessly.”

“Our leaders return power to the people — willingly. You do your duty. You serve your country. And ours is a country worthy of service,” the excerpt says. “We are not perfect, but at our best, we face head on the good, the bad, the truth of who we are. That’s what great nations do, and we are a great nation — the greatest of nations.”

By: Maegan Vazquez

2:23 PM: Biden’s first official reelection event offers clues on 2024 strategy

President Biden will arrive on Friday outside of Philadelphia for an event that is notable for its location (near Valley Forge, Pa.) and its timing (the eve of the third anniversary of the insurrection on Jan. 6, 2021).

But it will also be notable for another reason: It’s the first major official Biden-Harris event in a reelection effort formally announced nearly nine months ago. Biden has held fundraisers and hired campaign staff, who have moved to a headquarters in Wilmington, Del. He has attended rallies hosted by others — including a union rally shortly after announcing his bid — and he’s held plenty of events as part of his White House duties.

But he himself hasn’t held a major public campaign event, a strategy that campaign aides have said was deliberately undertaken to await a time when voters begin tuning into an election year.

Biden will be giving a speech on Friday afternoon, and another speech on Monday in Charleston, S.C. The twin events will help provide clues to how he plans to campaign for reelection.

Will the Biden campaign be able to build boisterous crowds for a candidate with low approval ratings? Will he linger on rope lines long after events to speak with individual voters, as he often did in his 2020 campaign? What strategies will the campaign employ to counter concerns about Biden’s age?

Much of the political attention in the coming weeks will be on the Republican presidential field. But the next few weeks also may provide clues for the kind of campaign the incumbent intends to run.

By: Matt Viser

2:05 PM: Analysis from Azi Paybarah, National reporter covering campaigns and breaking politics news.

Shortly before President Biden’s speech about democracy, one of his long-shot Democratic primary challengers, Rep. Dean Phillips (Minn.), released a statement attacking him on that issue. Phillips said Biden has been silent as his supporters “engaged in the biggest acts of voter disenfranchisement in decades.” Phillips has criticized Democrats after he didn’t make the ballot in Florida, North Carolina and Tennessee.

1:48 PM: Haley makes a play for younger voters — who grew up in the Trump era

At some point, nearly every political campaign makes some effort to appeal directly to younger voters. The extent of that outreach varies from candidate to candidate and year to year. But there’s always a pool of young people marginally attached to the political process that campaigns think are worth contacting, if only once.

From the outset, former ambassador Nikki Haley’s bid for the 2024 Republican presidential nomination has been to an extent predicated on age. When she announced her candidacy, she made a pointed reference to the need for a “new generation” of leadership — an obvious effort to contrast her age with those of both President Biden the front-runner for the GOP nomination, Donald Trump. (A few weeks ago, she released a campaign ad specifically calling out Biden’s age.) This reinforces both her opponents’ advanced ages and taps into generational frustrations regularly expressed by younger Americans.

Read the full story

By: Philip Bump

1:27 PM: Analysis from Amy B Wang, National politics reporter

Arkansas Gov. Sarah Huckabee Sanders (R) and her father, former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee, will campaign for former president Donald Trump in Iowa next week, with the state’s caucuses just days away.

Sanders, who previously served as White House press secretary under Trump, and Huckabee will speak at events in Des Moines and Ottumwa on Monday as part of the “Team Trump Iowa Faith Tour.”

1:08 PM: Analysis from Dylan Wells, Campaign reporter

Former U.N. ambassador Nikki Haley, who has drawn flak recently from other Republican presidential candidates for refusing to rule out serving as Donald Trump’s vice president, suggested that doing so would create a distraction.

Haley told the New Hampshire Union Leader that such a declaration would make that “the news for days” and stop her momentum in the race. Haley continued to say she is in the race to win it and not playing for second place. “[I]t’s highly offensive to think I would go through all of this to run for vice president,” she said.

12:44 PM: 2 key points on Trump’s lawyer suggesting Justice Kavanaugh owes Trump

There is saying the quiet part out loud, and then there’s what Trump lawyer Alina Habba just did.

Addressing the Supreme Court’s looming 14th Amendment decisions on whether Donald Trump can be disqualified from state ballots for engaging in insurrection, Habba decided it would be a good time to remind people of just how much Trump has done for Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh.

“I think it should be a slam dunk in the Supreme Court; I have faith in them,” Habba said on Fox News. “You know, people like Kavanaugh who the president fought for, who the president went through hell to get into place, he’ll step up.”

Read the full story

By: Aaron Blake

12:26 PM: Video: Where things stand with Trump’s battle to stay on the ballot

By: HyoJung Kim

12:07 PM: Haley says independents, Democrats coming on board

Asked Friday morning by a voter in Des Moines what her message is to Democrats and independents considering supporting her bid, former ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley pointed to polling showing that a majority of Americans say they don’t want a rematch between President Biden and former president Donald Trump.

“Whether you think Joe Biden is a nice man or not, you feel it everywhere. It’s Democrat chaos,” she said. People are “tired” and “want to see something go forward,” she added.

“That’s why we’re getting so many independents. That’s why conservative Democrats are coming on board with us. … They don’t want to see the division and the hatred,” Haley said. “They just want to see some sanity back again.”

By: Dylan Wells

11:42 AM: The presidential primaries feel funky this year, especially Iowa

For Republicans, Iowa remains the first nominating contest. It’s on Jan. 15. But it’s a caucus, not a primary. That means voters gather with their neighbors in the evening in places like a community gym or occasionally even someone’s living room, listen to speeches from campaign representatives and make their choices.

The process tends to reward the presidential candidates with the most hardcore followings. (Donald Trump actually did not win this state in 2016.) This year, it is considered a make-or-break night for Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, The Washington Post’s Hannah Knowles reports. He needs to win Iowa or at least come close to Trump.

“Either it happens here, or it doesn’t happen at all,” Jeff Angelo, an Iowa conservative talk show host, told Knowles.

Read the full story

By: Amber Phillips

11:27 AM: Analysis from Azi Paybarah, National reporter covering campaigns and breaking politics news.

Former U.N. ambassador Nikki Haley has a new 30-second ad in Iowa arguing she is in a strong position to defeat President Biden in November’s general election. The ad cites part of a Wall Street Journal poll from December; other polls show her in a tighter race. The focus on electability is part of Haley’s closing argument days ahead of Iowa caucuses.

11:14 AM: Analysis from Amber Phillips, Politics Reporter

Nevada is very confusing this primary season . There will actually be two nominating contests for Republicans, on two different days with two different sets of candidates — but only one of those helps choose the nominee, and Donald Trump himself is on only one ballot. This is because Nevada Republicans are ignoring a new state law to hold a primary there instead of a caucus; they’re holding both now.

10:50 AM: DeSantis PAC donated to some of his Iowa endorsers

A political action committee aligned with Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis (R) has given thousands of dollars apiece in campaign donations to some of the state legislators who endorsed him for president in Iowa, according to financial disclosures.

DeSantis entered the 2024 contest last spring with more than three dozen endorsements from Hawkeye State lawmakers, an unusual number so early in the race. It’s not unprecedented for presidential candidates’ committees to support allies, but the disclosures from a DeSantis group, called Great American Comeback, stand out.

Great American Comeback gave to committees for more than a dozen Iowa legislators who endorsed DeSantis in October, November and December, usually contributing $2,500 or $5,000. Groups supporting House Majority Leader Matt Windschitl and Senate President Amy Sinclair — who have been especially involved in supporting DeSantis’s campaign — received $15,000. Sinclair and Windschitl did not respond to requests for comment.

DeSantis campaign spokesman Andrew Romeo said in a statement that DeSantis “strives to make sure the party succeeds as a whole” and added: “Rising tides lift all boats — just as Republicans were victorious up and down the ballot in Florida under his leadership, as president, he will end the Republican Party’s culture of losing and make winning contagious.”

By: Hannah Knowles

10:34 AM: Why Trump says Jan. 6 rioters are ‘patriots’ but DeSantis doesn’t

An audience member at CNN’s town hall with Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis (R) managed to accomplish something Thursday evening that has often proved elusive over the past year: identify a subject on which DeSantis was willing to distance himself from Donald Trump.

Ronald Langel, introduced by host Kaitlan Collins, asked DeSantis to define the term “patriotism.” He offered an example to evaluate: “Did the January 6th insurrectionists display patriotism as some of them claim they did?”

“No. Of course not,” DeSantis replied. “I mean, that was not a good day for the country.”

Read the full story

By: Philip Bump

10:17 AM: Analysis from Amy B Wang, National politics reporter

President Biden touted Friday’s December jobs report as proof that 2023 was “a great year for American workers,” part of his administration’s efforts to convince people that the economy is stronger than they realize as GOP candidates continue to attack Biden on economic issues.

In a statement, the White House highlighted 2.7 million new jobs created last year, an unemployment rate consistently below 4 percent, and lower prices for gas, milk, toys, appliances and air travel.

10:10 AM: Analysis from Amy B Wang, National politics reporter

As former president Donald Trump campaigns in Iowa ahead of the caucuses, his advertising is already focused on the general election. In a new ad Friday, Trump goes head to head with President Biden, dinging him on higher mortgage interest rates and gas prices under his administration.

“Your investments fell, along with other things,” a narrator says, while the ad plays a clip of Biden slipping on the steps of Air Force One.

10:00 AM: Ramaswamy sells $33 million in stock to invest in presidential campaign

Entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy sold approximately $33.2 million in shares of his company, Roivant Sciences, on Tuesday, according to SEC filings — days after he sparked speculation that he might drop out of the GOP primary after halting TV advertising in the crucial final stretch of the race.

According to investment analytics tracker Verity, this is the first time Ramaswamy — who has lagged behind several rivals in the GOP race despite drawing national attention for his positions — has generated cash from his Roivant Sciences holdings since February, when he launched his campaign. Ramaswamy founded Roivant, a health-care and biotechnology company, in 2014. Per Verity, despite reducing his Roivant holdings by 5.5 percent, Ramaswamy still holds more than 51 million shares of the company, worth more than $563 million.

In an email to The Washington Post, a spokeswoman for Ramaswamy’s campaign confirmed that Ramaswamy will be “making a significant investment in the campaign.”

Last month, The Post reported that Ramaswamy’s campaign was halting its TV advertising ahead of the first nominating contests in January, arguing that its resources are better used elsewhere. That unusual move stirred suspicion that the entrepreneur might drop out and endorse former president Donald Trump , the overwhelming polling leader in the GOP race, whom Ramaswamy — more than any of his rivals — has defended and emulated. But his campaign said at the time that it was not pulling back on spending.

By: Mariana Alfaro

9:40 AM: Trump has built trust with antiabortion activists, they say

With voting set to begin in a Republican presidential race that many expect will soon coronate Donald Trump as the presumptive nominee, leading antiabortion figures have largely put their past criticisms aside — focusing instead on what a second Trump presidency could mean for the antiabortion movement.

“Is he the most pro-life person? No,” Kristan Hawkins, president of Students for Life, said in a recent interview. “But he keeps his deals.”

Marjorie Dannenfelser of Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, who had issued the searing critique of Trump’s abortion ban skepticism last spring, told The Washington Post in recent days that Trump has “built an enormous amount of trust with pro-life voters, as his presidency was the most consequential in American history for the pro-life cause.”

Read the full story

By: Caroline Kitchener, Josh Dawsey and Hannah Knowles

9:20 AM: DeSantis pushes back on Haley’s remark that N.H. could ‘correct’ Iowa

Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis — who has been endorsed in the GOP caucuses by Iowa Gov. Kim Reynolds (R) — is slamming comments from rival Nikki Haley, who has suggested that New Hampshire voters would “correct” the results if she loses in Iowa, the first state to hold a nominating contest.

During a recent New Hampshire town hall, Haley said: “Iowa starts it. You know that you correct it … and then my sweet state of South Carolina brings it home.”

DeSantis, during an interview Thursday with the Des Moines Register, said it was a “slap in the face to Iowans to say that they somehow need to be corrected.”

“It’s almost as if like she’s acknowledging she’s not going to do well here, and so she’s blaming the voters,” DeSantis said. “That’s unacceptable.”

By: Mariana Alfaro

9:01 AM: Analysis from Amy B Wang, National politics reporter

As he prepared to head to Iowa on Friday, former president Donald Trump lashed out at several GOP rivals in a lengthy social media post sprinkled with derisive nicknames. He called Ron DeSantis a “Bobblehead” who should return to being governor of Florida, former U.N. ambassador Nikki Haley a “Birdbrain” and former New Jersey governor Chris Christie “Sloppy.”

“Two very unreliable and disloyal people!” Trump ranted, referring to DeSantis and Haley.

8:40 AM: Ramaswamy increasingly embraces fringe theories, far-right claims in Iowa

BETTENDORF, Iowa — At a campaign event this week, Republican presidential candidate Vivek Ramaswamy touted an endorsement by a disgraced former congressman who lost his election after defending white nationalism. He refused to directly condemn white supremacy. And he said he didn’t recognize the name of Dylann Roof, the white supremacist who killed nine people at a historically Black church in South Carolina.

“Was there a point in our prior national history where there have been vicious forms of anti-Black or anti-Brown discrimination in this country, after the Civil War and otherwise? Yes. But you’re looking in the rearview mirror,” said Ramaswamy. He also made false incendiary claims that white supremacy was a fabricated threat as he stood in front of a banner that said “TRUTH.”

Read the full story

By: Meryl Kornfield

8:19 AM: DeSantis and Haley mostly went after Trump

Yes, they took some jabs at each other.

At a CNN town hall in Des Moines on Thursday night, Nikki Haley noted that she polls better than Gov. Ron DeSantis (R) in hypothetical matchups with President Biden .

DeSantis started his segment with a gag alluding to Haley’s recent flub of an Iowa basketball star’s name, presenting CNN moderator Kaitlan Collins with a jersey onstage and saying, “I heard the other day someone say that Kaitlan Collins had some basketball skills.” (Campaigning at a tailgate in Iowa, Haley had referred to Collins rather than Iowa Hawkeyes star Caitlin Clark.)

But both DeSantis and Haley focused most of their attacks on Trump, the overwhelming polling leader — a departure from the overall dynamic of the race in Iowa, in which Trump’s rivals have largely been assailing each other in town halls and TV ads.

DeSantis’s strategy has always hinged on peeling away Trump voters, even as he defends him on many fronts. He took sharp aim at Trump’s record — saying the former president didn’t stop an “invasion” at the U.S.-Mexico border and hadn’t dismantled “the bureaucracy.” Asked about his and other GOP candidates’ calling to end birthright citizenship for the children of undocumented immigrants born on U.S. soil — which would certainly face legal challenges — DeSantis made a point to note that Trump had campaigned on the idea and did not sign an executive order attempting to enact it.

“Do you think Donald Trump is not pro-life?” Collins asked after DeSantis assailed Trump’s criticism of state-level six-week abortion bans.

“Course not,” DeSantis replied.

By: Hannah Knowles and Dylan Wells

8:00 AM: Analysis from Amy B Wang, National politics reporter

Don Bolduc, a far-right retired Army brigadier general who unsuccessfully ran for U.S. Senate in New Hampshire in 2022, has endorsed Nikki Haley over former president Donald Trump.

“Look, I’m MAGA all the way. I’ve always been America First — but this time, I’m for Nikki Haley,” Bolduc said in a campaign ad , acknowledging that people might be surprised by his choice. “With Trump, there’s too many distractions. It’s too much risk of losing.”

7:45 AM: Where the Republican candidates will be today

Former president Donald Trump returns to Iowa for the first time since the calendar flipped to 2024, with events in Sioux Center and Mason City.

Nikki Haley, a former U.N. ambassador under Trump, will follow up her Iowa town hall Thursday night with a pair of events in the state — a visit to a rotary club and an event with New Hampshire Gov. Chris Sununu (R) hosted by Run GenZ, an organization that supports young Republicans running for office.

Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, also fresh off a CNN town hall Thursday evening, will start his day with an event in Des Moines before heading to Decorah and Cedar Falls for appearances.

By: Marianne LeVine, Dylan Wells and Hannah Knowles

7:30 AM: Biden, in Valley Forge speech, to hit Trump hard as threat to democracy

President Biden is scheduled to arrive outside Philadelphia on Friday afternoon to deliver his first speech of this election year, attempting to cast the 2024 presidential campaign as a battle for the future of American democracy and portray former president Donald Trump as its chief antagonist.

He plans to speak from a community college in Blue Bell, Pa., about 10 miles from Valley Forge National Historical Park, where George Washington mobilized troops during the Revolutionary War to fight for democracy some 250 years ago. The president’s remarks come on the eve of the anniversary of the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection, when a Trump-inspired mob stormed the U.S. Capitol and attempted to prevent Biden from taking office.

Read the full story

By: Matt Viser

7:18 AM: DeSantis pressed on Jan. 6 attack, same-sex marriage

Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis (R) was pressed on some topics he doesn’t normally bring up during a CNN town hall Thursday night in Des Moines .

With the third anniversary of the Jan. 6 , 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol approaching, one voter asked DeSantis for his “definition of patriotism” and if the Jan. 6 “insurrectionists” displayed it, as some of them claimed.

“No, of course not,” DeSantis said, adding “that was not a good day for the country.” But he also reiterated his frequent argument that Democrats and the media have overblown the events of that day, when a pro-Donald Trump mob stormed the Capitol and briefly halted the certification of the 2020 election, seeking to overturn Trump’s loss to Joe Biden.

CNN host Kaitlan Collins also brought up same-sex marriage, another thorny issue for Republicans. She noted that DeSantis has previously said marriage is between a man and a woman and asked if he still feels that way.

“That’s just what marriage is with the church,” DeSantis said, “and I respect the Supreme Court’s decision, so we’ve abided by that in Florida.” The Supreme Court legalized same-sex marriage nationwide in 2015. DeSantis went on to warn against people who “try to wield power against our religious institutions” and said he would protect them.

By: Hannah Knowles and Dylan Wells

7:00 AM: Haley says she ‘had Black friends growing up’ in follow-up to Civil War question

DES MOINES — Nikki Haley continues to do damage control for her omission of slavery in response to a question about the causes of the Civil War last month, and on Thursday she defended her response in part by noting, “I had Black friends growing up.”

The former South Carolina governor was asked by an attendee at a town hall in New Hampshire last month about the cause of the war, and she made no mention of slavery. After widespread pushback from both sides of the aisle, she acknowledged that the Civil War was “about slavery” and that it was a mistake to omit that fact from her initial answer.

“If you grow up in South Carolina, literally in second and third grade, you learn about slavery. You grow up and you have, you know, I had Black friends growing up. It is a very talked about thing. We have a big history in South Carolina, when it comes to, you know, slavery, when it comes to all the things that happened with the Civil War, all of that,” Haley said at a CNN town hall here.

Read the full story

By: Hannah Knowles and Dylan Wells
Former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley has trimmed former President Donald Trump’s lead in the Republican primary race in New Hampshire to single digits, according to a new CNN Poll conducted by the University of New Hampshire.

Trump still holds a meaningful lead in the poll, with the backing of 39% of likely Republican primary voters in New Hampshire compared to Haley’s 32%. The rest of the field lags far behind in the poll, with former New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie at 12%, entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy at 8%, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis at 5% and former Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson at less than 1%.

Support for Haley has risen 12 percentage points since the last CNN/UNH poll in November, continuing an upward trajectory that began last summer, while her opponents –- including Trump – have seen their numbers remain stable or tick slightly downward since autumn.

Haley’s support has grown dramatically among those voters registered as undeclared, New Hampshire’s term for independent registrants – she’s up 18 points with this group since November. It has also grown 20 points among those who are ideologically moderate. Those gains come amid a push from her campaign in the state, including an endorsement last month from New Hampshire Gov. Chris Sununu. The Granite State’s GOP primary is January 23.

The strength of Haley’s challenge to Trump in the state speaks to the contours of New Hampshire’s primary electorate, in which those more moderate and less staunchly partisan voters make up a larger share of participants than they do in Iowa’s first-in-the-nation caucuses, which are happening next week. Trump has crossed the 50% mark in most recent polling on the Iowa caucuses, and he holds wider majorities in national polls on the Republican nomination.

A little more than 4 in 10 likely primary voters in the CNN/UNH poll are undeclared voters who plan to vote in the GOP primary (45%), rather than registered Republicans. About one-third describe themselves as moderates (32%).

Trump leads Haley by 40 percentage points among conservatives, by 37 points among registered Republicans and by 17 points among those without college degrees, the poll finds. But Haley tops Trump by 42 points among moderates, 26 points among undeclared voters and 12 points among college graduates. Christie lands in second between Haley and Trump among each of those three groups.

Haley’s supporters, however, remain less solidly committed than Trump’s base. While 80% of voters backing Trump say they’ve definitely decided on him, a slim 54% majority of Haley’s current backers say the same.

Just 45% of those backing other candidates are decided, leaving room for further shifts in the race in the final two weeks of campaigning in the Granite State. Among those whose first choice for the nomination is neither Haley nor Trump, 36% say that Haley would be their second choice for the nomination, with 30% picking Trump as their top alternative. Those behind Christie break solidly toward Haley, with 65% saying they would support her were Christie not in the race, with fewer than 1 in 10 of his backers choosing any other candidate and 13% saying they would not vote. Christie has pushed back against calls from Haley allies to drop out, touting his direct opposition to Trump.

At present, only two Republican candidates are viewed more favorably than unfavorably by likely GOP primary voters in the state: Trump (47% favorable, 38% unfavorable) and Haley (39% favorable, 35% unfavorable), each of whom is viewed positively by less than half of the likely electorate.

Ratings for each of the major candidates now running have declined since last September. But DeSantis has seen a particularly notable decline: Just 29% now view him favorably, down from 44% early last autumn. Likely primary voters’ opinions of Ramaswamy are also negative, with their views of Hutchinson and Christie even further underwater.

Though only about 4 in 10 likely Republican primary voters in New Hampshire say they plan to vote for Trump, a 69% majority say they’re opposed to the ruling in neighboring Maine that Trump should not appear on the ballot based on the 14th Amendment’s “insurrectionist ban,” which Trump’s team is challenging. Just 23% say they support the decision by Maine Secretary of State Shenna Bellows, a Democrat, that Trump is ineligible to run in Maine’s GOP primary. Roughly three-quarters of likely Republican primary voters say they believe that partisan politics factored at least somewhat into the ruling, with 63% saying they factored “a lot” into the decision by Bellows. A minority of likely Republican primary voters (39%) say that Trump bears a great deal or a good amount of responsibility for “what happened at the U.S. Capitol” on January 6, 2021, when rioters entered the US Capitol during the certification of the 2020 election results.

Within the likely GOP electorate, there’s a significant divide between Trump’s supporters and those who don’t back the former president. Virtually all Trump supporters in New Hampshire strongly oppose the ruling blocking him from Maine’s ballot (99%), and just 3% say he bears much responsibility for the events of January 6. Views are less unanimous among those likely GOP primary voters who aren’t backing Trump. While half oppose the Maine ruling, 38% support it, with another 12% neutral or unsure. A 63% majority say Trump bears at least a good amount of responsibility for what happened on January 6.

There’s also a divide between Republican primary voters and the state’s residents as a whole. New Hampshire residents say, 49% to 42%, that they support the ruling that Trump is ineligible to run in Maine’s GOP primary, although a 54% majority also say they believe partisan politics factored at least somewhat into the decision. Most, 63%, say Trump bears a great deal or a good amount of responsibility for what happened on January 6.

President Joe Biden’s job approval rating in New Hampshire stands at 42%, with 57% disapproving, according to the poll.

Biden, who did not file to appear on New Hampshire’s primary ballot in order to comply with the Democratic National Committee’s delegate selection rules, nevertheless dominates the Democratic field: 69% of likely Democratic primary voters say they will write in his name, compared with 7% who plan to support Minnesota Rep. Dean Phillips and 6% who say they will vote for author Marianne Williamson.

About two-thirds of likely Democratic primary voters view Biden favorably (67%), with 16% viewing him unfavorably. Phillips’ favorability rating stands at just 10% among the likely electorate, with 30% viewing him unfavorably, and most neutral (24%) or unsure (36%). Williamson gets an 8% favorable rating, with half viewing her unfavorably.

The CNN New Hampshire poll was conducted online January 4-8 by the University of New Hampshire Survey Center. Results among the full sample of 1,864 New Hampshire adults drawn from a probability-based panel have a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 2.3 percentage points. Likely Republican and Democratic primary voters were identified through survey questions about their intention to vote. Results among 914 likely Republican primary voters have an error margin of plus or minus 3.2 percentage points. Results among 694 likely Democratic primary voters have an error margin of plus or minus 3.9 percentage points.

For more CNN news and newsletters create an account at CNN.com
Former President Donald Trump’s huge win in the Iowa caucuses on Monday enshrines one of the most astonishing comebacks in American political history.

Losing one-term presidents almost never mount subsequent successful primary campaigns, much less pull off landslides that demonstrate utter dominance of their party. Trump transformed the GOP in his populist, nationalist, nihilistic image in 2016. By claiming 50% of the vote in the biggest win in caucus history, putting him on course to his third consecutive nomination, he showed that eight years after his outsider presidential victory, the current GOP is entirely his party.

“The big night is going to be in November, when we take back our country,” Trump told his first proper victory party since he shocked the world by winning the 2016 election. His MAGA-hat wearing crowd greeted him with chants of “Trump, Trump, Trump” beneath two vast screens reading “Trump wins Iowa!”

But the ex-president’s rebound is more stunning for another reason. He won despite 91 criminal charges and other legal entanglements that threaten his freedom and his fortune. In a head-spinning snapshot of the unprecedented times, he’s expected to show up in a courtroom in Manhattan on Tuesday morning for the opening of a defamation trial.

His Iowa triumph came three years and nine days after he told a mob to “fight like hell” before it ransacked the US Capitol in an attempt to thwart the congressional certification of President Joe Biden ’s 2020 election win. Trump’s dominance on Monday night shows that among the most committed Republican voters, there is no price for him to pay for the worst attack on an election in modern history. In fact, his successful leveraging of his criminal plight to paint a narrative of persecution is the superpower that renewed his bond with GOP base voters and left his rivals with an impossible conundrum about how to exploit his liabilities.

His caucus victory also demonstrates the success of Trump’s election denial strategy, which has convinced millions of GOP voters of the false belief he was illegally ejected from power in 2020. For Americans who believe Biden’s warning that Trump is the “most anti-democratic president with a small ‘d’ in American history,” Monday night will have sown utter dread.

Trump’s vow to win a second term dedicated to “retribution” against his enemies, his labeling of political opponents as “vermin” and his warnings that immigrants are “poisoning the blood” of America, which are reminiscent of 1930s dictators, were no disqualification in Iowa. Instead, the president who attempted to overturn democracy to stay in power used democracy far more effectively than any of his Republican opponents to win an electoral endorsement from GOP voters who want him back in the White House.

Monday’s result posed huge questions for Trump’s rivals. Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis claimed second place, narrowly ahead of former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley. It is a showing that doesn’t offer DeSantis much hope of capturing the nomination, but may at least give him a rationale for staying in the race.

Haley came third but she is most focused on next week’s New Hampshire primary, where independent, undeclared voters and moderate Republicans offer her best chance to score an early win over Trump. But the electoral map of Iowa also illustrates the daunting task she faces in creating a path to the GOP nomination. In rural areas, where most Republicans live, she made little impression.

And while Haley and DeSantis proved there is a substantial constituency in the GOP for someone other than Trump, it’s not clear that it is large enough to defeat him, even if one of them were able to emerge as the sole alternative to the former president. While Trump was gracious to his opponents in his victory speech, there will be increasing pressure from his campaign for them to get out of the race so he can concentrate on Biden. Kari Lake, a staunch Trump supporter running for Senate in Arizona after refusing to recognize her 2022 gubernatorial loss, told reporters at his victory party that the other candidates couldn’t win and were running “vanity projects.”

The magnitude of Trump’s victory also makes it much harder for his distant rivals to claim any true momentum coming out of Iowa. “It’s not a race for second, it’s a race for relevancy and everyone is losing except for Donald Trump,” said Republican strategist Scott Jennings. “This Republican Party wants to give Donald Trump one more shot to prove them all wrong that everything was a witch hunt, that the election was rigged. … It’s obvious they want one more shot at it; it’s showing up in national polling and we are seeing it at these caucus sites.”

Iowa is only one state in a long nominating process. Votes cast in the caucuses represent a small proportion of the state’s population. But Trump’s dominance of rural voters in the state mirrors his support base across the country outside cities and suburbs. And polls suggest that his victory here can be replicated in most GOP bastions across the country.

Trump’s Iowa victory also sharpens the collision between the 2024 election and his legal imbroglio. His solidified status as a huge GOP front-runner increases the possibility that his party could nominate a convicted felon for president — an unheard-of-scenario — depending on the progress of his four looming criminal trials this year. The victor of the Iowa caucuses is expected in Manhattan on Tuesday morning for the opening of his defamation trial involving writer E. Jean Carroll, who has already been awarded $5 million in a separate trial after Trump was found liable for battery .

The former president’s dominance of Iowa also cements an impression that he is effectively running as an incumbent. To start with, many Republicans don’t believe he lost in 2020 and think he’s the rightful president, a theme Trump reinforced in his victory speech. And Trump’s aura and mastery of the GOP — recently demonstrated in his strong-arming of key party office holders for endorsements — has made it difficult for his rivals to take him on in a fair fight. That pseudo incumbency hugely helped Trump in Iowa, where he has leveraged relationships that he nurtured since he came second in the caucuses at the start of his shock rise to power in 2016.

During four years in the White House, Trump steered aid and attention the Hawkeye State’s way, constantly building political influence. The playbook is likely to work elsewhere, especially in the critical South Carolina primary that looms next month. CNN’s Manu Raju reported Monday that the ex-president is already pressuring one of the state’s senators, Tim Scott, for an endorsement as he seeks to effectively close out the nominating race early by crushing Haley on her own patch. Trump’s power is also underpinned by his campaign’s success in heading off any meaningful oversight from the Republican National Committee, which never made him pay a price for skipping campaign debates that it sanctioned. And Trump’s supporters now hold influence and power at every level of the Republican Party across the country. Many have taken legislative action in the wake of his false claims of fraud in 2020 that have made it harder to vote and easier to interfere in elections.

Yet while Trump’s effective incumbency is a huge factor, the fact he is out of power also allows him, paradoxically, to run as a candidate of change. The roles are reversed from 2020. Biden is the one in office and now has a more recent White House record than Trump’s to be judged on. But even when he was in the Oval Office, Trump never forgot that his magnetism among GOP voters lies in always being the outsider and a disruptor. His unhinged behavior, incessant shattering of rules and challenges to the law reinvigorated a brand perfectly tailored to Republican voters who despise “elites” in politics, government and the media. His uncouth language and politically incorrect jokes about the late Sen. John McCain and former President Jimmy Carter, who is in hospice care, only reinforce the impression he says what many of his supporters think.

In a flash of self-awareness, Trump explained his political method when he told North Dakota Gov. Doug Burgum, who endorsed him after his failed 2024 campaign, “You need controversy for traction sometimes.” In recent days, DeSantis has tried to position Trump as the “establishment.” But it’s a hopeless strategy: even when the front-runner was the head of the US government and his portrait was on the wall of every US government office and embassy, he was a scourge of the establishment.

Trump’s win makes the long theoretical prospect that he could win the White House a far more direct possibility. Barring some unforeseen event, his dominance in Iowa shows the extreme difficulty any of his remaining rivals will have of keeping him off the Republican ticket. And recent polls have shown him highly competitive and even ahead of Biden in the handful of swing states that will decide the destiny of the White House. In a nation split down the middle, the election will be close whatever happens. It may concern Democrats that while Trump hasn’t toned down the unhinged wildness of his public appearances, his victory in Iowa was the first validation of a far more professional political operation than he deployed in either the 2016 or 2020 elections.

Still, the Biden campaign, beset by growing concern among Democrats about the president’s reelection prospects, has argued that a big victory for Trump in Iowa would begin to awaken Americans who rejected him in 2020 of the real danger that he could recapture the White House. While Trump was strong even in suburban areas around Des Moines, this may not translate into a similar performance among more moderate voters in corresponding areas in less conservative states. Trump’s deficit among this group nationwide cost him the 2020 election.

Trump’s triumph will also reverberate around the world, and force US allies to confront the possibility that the most antagonistic president in modern history, who cozied up to dictators and spurned America’s traditional friends in democratic nations, could soon be back.

European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde sounded the alarm on France 2 television last week. “If we are to draw lessons from history, as in the way he managed the four years of his mandate, it is clearly a threat,” she said.

A return to office for Trump could represent an existential danger to NATO, which helped keep peace in Europe through the Cold War and into the 21st century. Trump’s victory will also give Russian President Vladimir Putin another reason to prolong the bloody war in Ukraine. Trump said Monday he’d get Putin in a room with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky, an encounter that could only end on terms unfavorable to the Ukrainians.

For more CNN news and newsletters create an account at CNN.com
With the Iowa caucuses serving as the starting pistol for the 2024 presidential race, former President Donald Trump has solidified his influence over the Republican Party as key GOP politicians rush to endorse him. In a last-minute scramble indicative of Trump’s power, Ohio Lt. Gov. Jon Husted and Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, among others, have publicly backed Trump, reaffirming his hold on the party as the caucuses approach.

Husted, who is eyeing a gubernatorial bid, made his endorsement with the Iowa result almost a foregone conclusion—Trump was expected to clinch a victory. Rubio’s endorsement marked a stark reversal from his previous clashes with Trump during the 2016 campaign.

Trump’s campaign has been keenly observing not only who endorses him, but the timing of these endorsements, clearly valuing those who showed support before the Iowa voting commenced. This strategic maneuvering has resulted in Trump amassing an impressive roster of endorsements—169 House members, 19 senators, and endorsements from former contenders like Ramaswamy and North Dakota Gov. Doug Burgum. Sen. Tim Scott of South Carolina is also deliberating his endorsement, considering the strategic timing before South Carolina’s primary.

These endorsements go beyond mere political gestures. They represent calculated decisions by politicians to align themselves with the influential figure of Trump, whose campaign is less about reciprocal relationships and more about demanding loyalty and public demonstrations of support. The stakes are high, as not endorsing Trump carries the risk of his retaliation, potentially manifesting as support for a primary challenger or denunciation that could lead to political ostracism from the fervent MAGA base.

In Iowa, Trump’s dominance was evident. About seven in ten caucusgoers had known they would support Trump, who has reshaped the GOP through his “Make America Great Again” movement. Despite the challenges from DeSantis, Haley, and Ramaswamy, no candidate could match Trump’s demographic advantages. He triumphed in rural and small-town communities, with white evangelicals, and those without a college degree, reflecting his resonant political message on issues like immigration and the economy.

As the Iowa caucuses conclude, the narrative is unmistakable: Donald Trump maintains a powerful grip on the Republican Party. His ability to command endorsements from GOP politicians underlines his enduring influence, setting the tone for the 2024 presidential race. This consolidation of support suggests that Trump’s impact on the party’s direction and electorate remains formidable as the journey to the Republican convention and beyond continues.

Relevant articles:

– Rubio’s Trump endorsement was a profile in cowardice. And it wasn’t even the worst.

– Most Trump supporters in Iowa caucuses say they knew they’d support him all along, AP VoteCast shows , PBS NewsHour, Tue, 16 Jan 2024 04:19:52 GMT

– What is the Iowa caucus and why is it important? , Al Jazeera English, Mon, 15 Jan 2024 13:57:57 GMT

– Trump’s Iowa caucus win shows his power over evangelical voters , MSNBC, Tue, 16 Jan 2024 11:00:41 GMT
The 2024 presidential election will be unlike any other, political strategists and pollsters say.

Donald Trump’s indictments and ballot access, President Biden’s age and absence in New Hampshire, the economy, third party candidates and dissatisfaction with both parties could lead to “unexpected” results come November.

“Expect the unexpected. Consider all of the old rules and histories and throw them out the window,” Democratic pollster John Zogby told The Post.

The 2024 primary season will officially begin Jan. 15 with the GOP’s Iowa caucuses. Trump seems to have a massive lead over his competition in the Hawkeye state and nationally, according to polls, and is also edging out Biden in key swing states by a significant margin.

But Trump’s lead could change depending on how well he does in the early states, and if any other candidate is able to get within striking distance of the former president, according to strategists and pollsters.

“Trump does well because he’s not in charge right now, and by any measure Americans are just unhappy, fed up, in a sour mood,” Zogby said, noting that consumer confidence is rising but has yet to translate to a “period of good feelings” under Biden.

Former UN ambassador Nikki Haley has gotten the closest to Trump in the polls, coming within single digits in New Hampshire. But the blowback she received after failing to mention slavery as the cause of the Civil War could show just how volatile the race is.

“We’ll see if that’s a momentary blip… or if it will be a moment that defines the campaign,” Henry Olsen, a veteran political analyst and senior fellow with the Ethics and Public Policy Center, told The Post.

The CNN debate between Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis and Haley five days before the Iowa election could also “go a long way in determining” who the first-in-the-nation voters swing to, he added.

Democratic strategist Brad Bannon predicted that Haley still “has a chance to upend Trump.”

“It would be more difficult for the president to beat Haley than it would be for him to beat Trump,” he added.

In the general election, polls show 20-25% of voters say they wouldn’t want to vote for Biden or Trump, and those voters “will be the ones to decide the election,” Olsen said.

The dissatisfaction with both parties could also lead to a major voter share going for third party candidates like Robert F. Kennedy Jr., Cornel West and Jill Stein.

Kennedy in particular has been polling as high as 26% in support and has caught the attention of both Republicans and Democrats.

The schedule of Trump’s court cases and whether he’s removed from more state ballots could also throw a wrench into his ability to beat Biden.

“What happens if Trump gets a mistrial?” Olsen said. “What happens if that happens first?”

Both Trump and Biden, who are 77 and 81 respectively, have to deal with possible health issues. Polls show voters are more concerned with Biden’s health than the former president’s, but either one could be open to possible health scares, Olsen said.

“You never know what a 77-year-old or an 81-year-old man’s body contains underneath.”

Biden, who seems likely to become the Democratic nominee, may also not be a shoe-in due to his competition.

He first has to first deal with New Hampshire, where a tiff between the DNC and the state over the primary schedule led to him not being on the ballot.

Democratic rival Rep. Dean Phillips (D-MN) is campaigning heavily in the first-in-the-nation primary state in a bid to get traction over the incumbent, but a write-in campaign is underway to save Biden from embarrassment on Jan. 23.

“There’s a potential that an unknown like Dean Phillips could embarrass Joe Biden, much like Eugene McCarthy embarrassed LBJ in 1968,” Zogby said. (Lyndon B. Johnson, who was an incumbent at the time, failed to register for the New Hampshire ballot)

Olsen highlighted that for Biden, it will be about the margin of victory.

“How many people will simply vote for Dean Phillips or Marianne Williamson to cast a protest vote? Biden’s not going to lose the primary… but what happens if Biden only gets 60% in the Michigan primary?”

The economy will be a huge factor for Biden getting reelected, Bannon told The Post.

“Economists are talking about the possibility of a soft landing for the economy. If the soft landing does in fact play out, I think that will be a major boost for the Biden election campaign.”
The 2024 election cycle has kicked off, and the race is heating up even as Election Day is months away .

President Joe Biden is seeking another term in the White House, and with former President Donald Trump's hat also in the ring, a 2020 rematch is a real possibility. Democrats are expected to fall firmly behind Biden, and Trump has held a stubborn lead in polls on the Republican side despite several high-profile candidates aiming to unseat him.

Here are the latest developments on the path to the 2024 election:

Start the day smarter. Get all the news you need in your inbox each morning.

Biden remains a strong frontrunner for his party's nomination. Several lesser-known Democratic candidates are mounting challenges to the president, but they have yet to gain much traction.

Background: First elected in 1972 , Biden served as a senator from Delaware for 36 years before being elected vice president in 2008, mounting a victory alongside former President Barack Obama. After serving two terms as vice president, he took a brief hiatus from government work before returning to run, and win, in 2020.

Views: Biden's campaign is focused on the "battle for the soul of America," doubling down on the central message of his campaign four years ago. He said the question facing the nation is "whether, in the years ahead, we have more freedom or less freedom, more rights or fewer."

Background: Phillips represents Minnesota in the House of Representatives and was first elected to Congress in 2018. Before entering politics, Phillips made his name as a businessman, heading up Phillips Distilling and serving as chair of Talenti Gelato.

His views: Phillips is a moderate with a reputation in Washington for reaching across the aisle. A member of the Problem Solvers Caucus , one of his major legislative accomplishments was the creation of the Paycheck Protection Program , which he co-authored with Texas Republican Rep. Chip Roy. The program provided loans to businesses to help them during the economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Background: Williamson is a self-help author and spiritual leader who ran unsuccessfully for president in 2020.

Her views: Williamson supports abortion rights, a single-payer health care system and reparations for descendants of formerly enslaved Americans. She has suggested creating a U.S. Department of Children and Youth to increase child advocacy and a U.S. Department of Peace.

Since his win in 2016, Trump has served as de facto leader of the Republican Party, his influence still looming large in Washington. However, after Trump-endorsed candidates suffered in the 2022 midterms, and amid concerns around his age as well, speculation swirled that there was an opening for a new leader to rise. Here are the candidates who have thrown their hat in the ring.

Background: Binkley is CEO, president, and co-founder of the mergers and acquisitions conglomerate Generational Group. He is also a faith leader, co-founding and serving as the pastor at Create Church in Richardson, Texas.

His views: Binkley has said he hopes to prioritize balancing the budget, lowering health care costs, creating bipartisan immigration reform and putting more community emphasis on education. Binkley is against abortion rights. His campaign website says he was "thankful" when the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, but that a "culture of life" means prioritizing adoption as well.

Background: Haley started her political career in South Carolina's state legislature, where she served for 6 years before mounting a successful campaign for the governor's office in 2010. In 2016, former President Donald Trump nominated Haley to be U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, a position she held for a year before unexpectedly stepping down in 2018.

Her views: Haley opposes abortion rights and has been a vocal supporter of Israel in its ongoing war with Hamas. While on the campaign trail, she has focused on illegal immigration, advocating for a return of the Trump-era "Remain in Mexico" policy as well as the defunding of sanctuary cities. Haley has told voters she hopes to crack down on China's influence on the U.S. economy. She has supported Trump in the past but also criticized him after the Jan. 6, 2021, Capitol attack.

Background: Prior to 2016, Trump dabbled in politics, often sounding off on issues like the birther movement meant to cast doubt on former President Barack Obama's citizenship and the case surrounding the now-exonerated Central Park Five. However, he was still primarily known for real estate and his forays into reality television, famously starring in "The Apprentice."

In 2016, Trump won the White House, serving a full four-year term before being defeated by Biden in his reelection bid.

His views: The former president has, without evidence, centered much of his campaign on the claim that his political enemies are fueling his ongoing criminal cases. He has said he would consider pardoning participants in the Jan. 6, 2021, Capitol riot, which his critics say was inspired by his false claims of election fraud.

The potential of a tight Trump-Biden rematch opens the door for a third-party candidate to be integral in determining the results of the race. A third name on the presidential ballot could drain votes from either of the two major party nominees, tipping the scales toward either Biden or Trump.

Background: Kennedy is an environmental lawyer known for trumpeting a debunked theory that vaccines can be linked to autism. In 2017, Trump invited Kennedy to head up a presidential commission on vaccine safety.

His views: He is campaigning on a platform of fighting for the "liberties guaranteed by the Constitution ," according to his campaign website. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Kennedy opposed vaccine mandates, calling them an infringement on individual liberty and at times used the Holocaust as a historical comparison .

Background: West is an American academic and philosopher known for his progressive ideals. He has taught at several Ivy League institutions and works now as a professor of philosophy at Union Theological Seminary.

His views: West is a proponent of establishing Medicare for All, and barring oil and gas subsidies, as well as drilling on public lands. Long a vocal opponent of militarism, West's campaign website lists "end the wars" as a key priority, which would include disbanding NATO and banning nuclear weapons across the globe.

Background: Stein is a doctor and organizer who has championed causes like campaign finance reform and environmental protection. She has run for president twice before, launching bids in 2012 and 2016.

Her views: Stein paints herself as an outsider, coming in to disrupt a political system ruled by money and special interests. In her campaign launch video, posted to X , she called for an economic bill of rights including "the right to a job, to health care, to housing, to food, education and more.

This article originally appeared on USA TODAY: Who is running for president? Get to know the 2024 presidential candidates.















Based on the potential scenario where Donald Trump wins the 2024 Presidential Election, we can make several specific predictions about the potential consequences and the direction in which he might lead the United States during his second tenure in the White House. These predictions will take into account Trump's previous policies, public statements, and the current political context based on the historical and contemporary narratives of his political career and align with the strategies and ideologies he has previously embraced.

Firstly, we can predict a substantial policy shift, putting emphasis on further tax cuts, deregulation, and efforts to diminish the power of certain federal agencies, particularly those related to environmental protection. Trump, having already withdrawn the US from the Paris Climate Agreement during his first term, might continue to unravel climate change policies, resulting in a more fossil fuel-driven energy policy. Furthermore, his commitment to securing US borders might culminate in renewed endeavors to construct a Southern border wall and implement stringent immigration regulations.

Secondly, there is a likelihood of radical shifts in foreign policy. Trump may continue to challenge traditional alliances such as NATO, question the defense commitments to allies, and adopt an isolationist stance. Relations with adversarial states like Iran and North Korea could oscillate between antagonistic rhetoric and unconventional diplomatic outreach similar to what was observed in his first term.

Thirdly, Trump's win could lead to a further deepening divide within the US, where polarized factions of the electorate either strongly support or vehemently oppose his actions. This may also foster large-scale public protests and possibly exacerbate the political tension between federal and state governments, especially with those governed by the opposition party.

Fourthly, Trump’s victory could catalyze significant changes in the judiciary, with potential additional conservative appointments to the Supreme Court and lower federal courts, consolidating a conservative legal legacy that could influence American jurisprudence for decades.

Lastly, Trump's win could have implications for media relations, with an expectation of continued hostility toward traditional media outlets he deems as 'fake news' and a possible bolstering of more conservative media platforms, potentially leading to increasing misinformation and widening societal information bubbles. 

These predictions, obviously, hinge on a myriad of factors, including congressional composition, global dynamics, and unforeseen events that could alter political courses significantly.















Trump Wins 2024: Implications and Challenges Ahead


The query posed reflects a profound contemplation of the United States' political trajectory and the ramifications of a Donald Trump victory in the 2024 Presidential Election. Such a scenario invites speculation not only about the immediate consequences of his triumph but also about the enduring influence on American polity and its global repercussions. Given the factual data and historical precedents outlined—Trump's pervasive control over the Republican Party, his success despite legal entanglements, and the profound polarization his figure represents—the intent is to forecast tangible implications should he return to the White House.

A Trump victory in 2024 presages a transformative period in American history that could reinforce and extend the profound changes he implemented during his first term. Markedly, we would witness a policy pivot prioritizing tax cuts, deregulation, and efforts to scale back the role of federal agencies, especially those influencing environmental policy. Trump's commitment to stringent immigration regulations would likely see new life, potentially materializing in revived efforts to erect a border wall and enforce strict entry controls.

Foreign policy under a second Trump administration might oscillate between isolationism and unpredictable engagement. A potential disregard for multilateral frameworks like NATO could strain traditional alliances, while his disposition toward adversarial states might swing from fiery rhetoric to attempts at unconventional diplomacy similar to his first term.

Domestically, his win could exacerbate the polarization gripping the nation. Trump's political style and policies could not only deepen the ideological divide but also incite large-scale protests and political tension between federal entities and opposition-governed states.

In judicial terms, his re-election could herald the solidification of a conservative legal orthodoxy, given potential further appointments to the Supreme Court and lower federal courts—appointments that would imprint a lasting conservative ethos on American jurisprudence.

Media relations would remain fractious. A resurgent hostility toward outlets labeled as "fake news" would probably persist, potentially exacerbating misinformation and fueling increasingly insular information bubbles across the political spectrum.

These predictions remain dependent on various factors including congressional composition, global dynamics, and unforeseen events that could significantly disrupt projected political paths. Nonetheless, the scenario in which Trump secures the presidency again in 2024 serves as a pivotal juncture—a moment with the potential to redefine not only America's internal political landscape but also its role and image on the world stage.















