Jonathan Haidt on TikTok ban: I’m ‘thrilled’ about the prospect of TikTok being gone — ‘It harms kids’
Published Tue, Jan 21 20254:53 PM EST
Lee Ying Shan
Jonathan Haidt, a social psychologist at New York University’s Stern School of Business, said he was “thrilled” about the prospect of TikTok being banned in the U.S. for the sake of young people’s mental health.
“It’s a huge threat to children. I have been talking about this for years now and I’m so glad that people are finally waking up to the fact that social media is not a free good. It harms kids,” he told CNBC’s “Squawk Box Asia” on Tuesday.
Haidt is the author of “The Anxious Generation: How the Great Rewiring of Childhood Is Causing an Epidemic of Mental Illness.”
He has long argued that the rise of social media and the decline in unsupervised play are major factors contributing to the mental health crisis among young people.
He cited a “large convergence of evidence” pointing to around 2012 as the turning point in adolescent mental health in the U.S., Canada and the U.K.
This corresponds to the time when smartphones became ubiquitous and social media platforms became more engaging, he said.
“The kids born after 1995, the first generation to grow up with the internet, are much more anxious and depressed than the kids born before 1995, or even before 1990,” Haidt added.
Haidt said that TikTok, in particular, is harmful because of its highly addictive algorithm.
“It’s designed to be as addictive as possible. It’s designed to keep you scrolling and it does so very successfully. And so it’s really capturing kids and taking their attention away from other things, especially from real-world activities like playing and socializing,” he said.
He suggested governments should raise the minimum age for social media use to 16 and ban smartphones in schools.
“We have to do a whole bunch of things but the most important thing is to restore childhood, to give kids a chance to play and explore without being constantly monitored and evaluated,” he said.
The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the ban on TikTok on Jan. 17, backing the government’s claims that the app poses a national security risk.
TikTok is owned by Chinese company ByteDance, and the U.S. government has expressed concerns that the app could be used to collect user data or spread propaganda.
The ban means that TikTok must cease operations in the U.S. by Jan. 19 unless it is sold to a new owner.